

"Places of nestling green for Poets made."
                                 STORY OF RIMINI.



I stood tip-toe upon a little hill,
The air was cooling, and so very still.
That the sweet buds which with a modest pride
Pull droopingly, in slanting curve aside,
Their scantly leaved, and finely tapering stems,
Had not yet lost those starry diadems
Caught from the early sobbing of the morn.
The clouds were pure and white as flocks new shorn,
And fresh from the clear brook; sweetly they slept
On the blue fields of heaven, and then there crept
A little noiseless noise among the leaves,
Born of the very sigh that silence heaves:
For not the faintest motion could be seen
Of all the shades that slanted o'er the green.
There was wide wand'ring for the greediest eye,
To peer about upon variety;
Far round the horizon's crystal air to skim,
And trace the dwindled edgings of its brim;
To picture out the quaint, and curious bending
Of a fresh woodland alley, never ending;
Or by the bowery clefts, and leafy shelves,
Guess were the jaunty streams refresh themselves.
I gazed awhile, and felt as light, and free
As though the fanning wings of Mercury
Had played upon my heels: I was light-hearted,
And many pleasures to my vision started;
So I straightway began to pluck a posey
Of luxuries bright, milky, soft and rosy.

A bush of May flowers with the bees about them;
Ah, sure no tasteful nook would be without them;
And let a lush laburnum oversweep them,
And let long grass grow round the roots to keep them
Moist, cool and green; and shade the violets,
That they may bind the moss in leafy nets.

A filbert hedge with wild briar overtwined,
And clumps of woodbine taking the soft wind
Upon their summer thrones; there too should be
The frequent chequer of a youngling tree,
That with a score of light green brethen shoots
From the quaint mossiness of aged roots:
Round which is heard a spring-head of clear waters
Babbling so wildly of its lovely daughters
The spreading blue bells: it may haply mourn
That such fair clusters should be rudely torn
From their fresh beds, and scattered thoughtlessly
By infant hands, left on the path to die.

Open afresh your round of starry folds,
Ye ardent marigolds!
Dry up the moisture from your golden lids,
For great Apollo bids
That in these days your praises should be sung
On many harps, which he has lately strung;
And when again your dewiness he kisses,
Tell him, I have you in my world of blisses:
So haply when I rove in some far vale,
His mighty voice may come upon the gale.

Here are sweet peas, on tip-toe for a flight:
With wings of gentle flush o'er delicate white,
And taper fulgent catching at all things,
To bind them all about with tiny rings.

Linger awhile upon some bending planks
That lean against a streamlet's rushy banks,
And watch intently Nature's gentle doings:
They will be found softer than ring-dove's cooings.
How silent comes the water round that bend;
Not the minutest whisper does it send
To the o'erhanging sallows: blades of grass
Slowly across the chequer'd shadows pass.
Why, you might read two sonnets, ere they reach
To where the hurrying freshnesses aye preach
A natural sermon o'er their pebbly beds;
Where swarms of minnows show their little heads,
Staying their wavy bodies 'gainst the streams,
To taste the luxury of sunny beams
Temper'd with coolness. How they ever wrestle
With their own sweet delight, and ever nestle
Their silver bellies on the pebbly sand.
If you but scantily hold out the hand,
That very instant not one will remain;
But turn your eye, and they are there again.
The ripples seem right glad to reach those cresses,
And cool themselves among the em'rald tresses;
The while they cool themselves, they freshness give,
And moisture, that the bowery green may live:
So keeping up an interchange of favours,
Like good men in the truth of their behaviours
Sometimes goldfinches one by one will drop
From low hung branches; little space they stop;
But sip, and twitter, and their feathers sleek;
Then off at once, as in a wanton freak:
Or perhaps, to show their black, and golden wings,
Pausing upon their yellow flutterings.
Were I in such a place, I sure should pray
That nought less sweet, might call my thoughts away,
Than the soft rustle of a maiden's gown
Fanning away the dandelion's down;
Than the light music of her nimble toes
Patting against the sorrel as she goes.
How she would start, and blush, thus to be caught
Playing in all her innocence of thought.
O let me lead her gently o'er the brook,
Watch her half-smiling lips, and downward look;
O let me for one moment touch her wrist;
Let me one moment to her breathing list;
And as she leaves me may she often turn
Her fair eyes looking through her locks auburne.
What next? A tuft of evening primroses,
O'er which the mind may hover till it dozes;
O'er which it well might take a pleasant sleep,
But that 'tis ever startled by the leap
Of buds into ripe flowers; or by the flitting
Of diverse moths, that aye their rest are quitting;
Or by the moon lifting her silver rim
Above a cloud, and with a gradual swim
Coming into the blue with all her light.
O Maker of sweet poets, dear delight
Of this fair world, and all its gentle livers;
Spangler of clouds, halo of crystal rivers,
Mingler with leaves, and dew and tumbling streams,
Closer of lovely eyes to lovely dreams,
Lover of loneliness, and wandering,
Of upcast eye, and tender pondering!
Thee must I praise above all other glories
That smile us on to tell delightful stories.
For what has made the sage or poet write
But the fair paradise of Nature's light?
In the calm grandeur of a sober line,
We see the waving of the mountain pine;
And when a tale is beautifully staid,
We feel the safety of a hawthorn glade:
When it is moving on luxurious wings,
The soul is lost in pleasant smotherings:
Fair dewy roses brush against our faces,
And flowering laurels spring from diamond vases;
O'er head we see the jasmine and sweet briar,
And bloomy grapes laughing from green attire;
While at our feet, the voice of crystal bubbles
Charms us at once away from all our troubles:
So that we feel uplifted from the world,
Walking upon the white clouds wreath'd and curl'd.
So felt he, who first told, how Psyche went
On the smooth wind to realms of wonderment;
What Psyche felt, and Love, when their full lips
First touch'd; what amorous, and fondling nips
They gave each other's cheeks; with all their sighs,
And how they kist each other's tremulous eyes:
The silver lamp,--the ravishment,--the wonder--
The darkness,--loneliness,--the fearful thunder;
Their woes gone by, and both to heaven upflown,
To bow for gratitude before Jove's throne.
So did he feel, who pull'd the boughs aside,
That we might look into a forest wide,
To catch a glimpse of Fawns, and Dryades
Coming with softest rustle through the trees;
And garlands woven of flowers wild, and sweet,
Upheld on ivory wrists, or sporting feet:
Telling us how fair, trembling Syrinx fled
Arcadian Pan, with such a fearful dread.
Poor nymph,--poor Pan,--how he did weep to find,
Nought but a lovely sighing of the wind
Along the reedy stream; a half heard strain,
Full of sweet desolation--balmy pain.

What first inspired a bard of old to sing
Narcissus pining o'er the untainted spring?
In some delicious ramble, he had found
A little space, with boughs all woven round;
And in the midst of all, a clearer pool
Than e'er reflected in its pleasant cool,
The blue sky here, and there, serenely peeping
Through tendril wreaths fantastically creeping.
And on the bank a lonely flower he spied,
A meek and forlorn flower, with naught of pride,
Drooping its beauty o'er the watery clearness,
To woo its own sad image into nearness:
Deaf to light Zephyrus it would not move;
But still would seem to droop, to pine, to love.
So while the Poet stood in this sweet spot,
Some fainter gleamings o'er his fancy shot;
Nor was it long ere he had told the tale
Of young Narcissus, and sad Echo's bale.

Where had he been, from whose warm head out-flew
That sweetest of all songs, that ever new,
That aye refreshing, pure deliciousness,
Coming ever to bless
The wanderer by moonlight? to him bringing
Shapes from the invisible world, unearthly singing
From out the middle air, from flowery nests,
And from the pillowy silkiness that rests
Full in the speculation of the stars.
Ah! surely he had burst our mortal bars;
Into some wond'rous region he had gone,
To search for thee, divine Endymion!

He was a Poet, sure a lover too,
Who stood on Latmus' top, what time there blew
Soft breezes from the myrtle vale below;
And brought in faintness solemn, sweet, and slow
A hymn from Dian's temple; while upswelling,
The incense went to her own starry dwelling.
But though her face was clear as infant's eyes,
Though she stood smiling o'er the sacrifice,
The Poet wept at her so piteous fate,
Wept that such beauty should be desolate:
So in fine wrath some golden sounds he won,
And gave meek Cynthia her Endymion.

Queen of the wide air; thou most lovely queen
Of all the brightness that mine eyes have seen!
As thou exceedest all things in thy shine,
So every tale, does this sweet tale of thine.
O for three words of honey, that I might
Tell but one wonder of thy bridal night!

Where distant ships do seem to show their keels,
Phoebus awhile delayed his mighty wheels,
And turned to smile upon thy bashful eyes,
Ere he his unseen pomp would solemnize.
The evening weather was so bright, and clear,
That men of health were of unusual cheer;
Stepping like Homer at the trumpet's call,
Or young Apollo on the pedestal:
And lovely women were as fair and warm,
As Venus looking sideways in alarm.
The breezes were ethereal, and pure,
And crept through half closed lattices to cure
The languid sick; it cool'd their fever'd sleep,
And soothed them into slumbers full and deep.
Soon they awoke clear eyed: nor burnt with thirsting,
Nor with hot fingers, nor with temples bursting:
And springing up, they met the wond'ring sight
Of their dear friends, nigh foolish with delight;
Who feel their arms, and breasts, and kiss and stare,
And on their placid foreheads part the hair.
Young men, and maidens at each other gaz'd
With hands held back, and motionless, amaz'd
To see the brightness in each others' eyes;
And so they stood, fill'd with a sweet surprise,
Until their tongues were loos'd in poesy.
Therefore no lover did of anguish die:
But the soft numbers, in that moment spoken,
Made silken ties, that never may be broken.
Cynthia! I cannot tell the greater blisses,
That follow'd thine, and thy dear shepherd's kisses:
Was there a Poet born?--but now no more,
My wand'ring spirit must no further soar.--




SPECIMEN OF AN INDUCTION TO A POEM.


Lo! I must tell a tale of chivalry;
For large white plumes are dancing in mine eye.
Not like the formal crest of latter days:
But bending in a thousand graceful ways;
So graceful, that it seems no mortal hand,
Or e'en the touch of Archimago's wand,
Could charm them into such an attitude.
We must think rather, that in playful mood,
Some mountain breeze had turned its chief delight,
To show this wonder of its gentle might.
Lo! I must tell a tale of chivalry;
For while I muse, the lance points slantingly
Athwart the morning air: some lady sweet,
Who cannot feel for cold her tender feet,
From the worn top of some old battlement
Hails it with tears, her stout defender sent:
And from her own pure self no joy dissembling,
Wraps round her ample robe with happy trembling.
Sometimes, when the good Knight his rest would take,
It is reflected, clearly, in a lake,
With the young ashen boughs, 'gainst which it rests,
And th' half seen mossiness of linnets' nests.
Ah! shall I ever tell its cruelty,
When the fire flashes from a warrior's eye,
And his tremendous hand is grasping it,
And his dark brow for very wrath is knit?
Or when his spirit, with more calm intent,
Leaps to the honors of a tournament,
And makes the gazers round about the ring
Stare at the grandeur of the balancing?
No, no! this is far off:--then how shall I
Revive the dying tones of minstrelsy,
Which linger yet about lone gothic arches,
In dark green ivy, and among wild larches?
How sing the splendour of the revelries,
When buts of wine are drunk off to the lees?
And that bright lance, against the fretted wall,
Beneath the shade of stately banneral,
Is slung with shining cuirass, sword, and shield?
Where ye may see a spur in bloody field.
Light-footed damsels move with gentle paces
Round the wide hall, and show their happy faces;
Or stand in courtly talk by fives and sevens:
Like those fair stars that twinkle in the heavens.
Yet must I tell a tale of chivalry:
Or wherefore comes that knight so proudly by?
Wherefore more proudly does the gentle knight,
Rein in the swelling of his ample might?

Spenser! thy brows are arched, open, kind,
And come like a clear sun-rise to my mind;
And always does my heart with pleasure dance,
When I think on thy noble countenance:
Where never yet was ought more earthly seen
Than the pure freshness of thy laurels green.
Therefore, great bard, I not so fearfully
Call on thy gentle spirit to hover nigh
My daring steps: or if thy tender care,
Thus startled unaware,
Be jealous that the foot of other wight
Should madly follow that bright path of light
Trac'd by thy lov'd Libertas; he will speak,
And tell thee that my prayer is very meek;
That I will follow with due reverence,
And start with awe at mine own strange pretence.
Him thou wilt hear; so I will rest in hope
To see wide plains, fair trees and lawny slope:
The morn, the eve, the light, the shade, the flowers:
Clear streams, smooth lakes, and overlooking towers.




CALIDORE.

A fragment.


Young Calidore is paddling o'er the lake;
His healthful spirit eager and awake
To feel the beauty of a silent eve,
Which seem'd full loath this happy world to leave;
The light dwelt o'er the scene so lingeringly.
He bares his forehead to the cool blue sky,
And smiles at the far clearness all around,
Until his heart is well nigh over wound,
And turns for calmness to the pleasant green
Of easy slopes, and shadowy trees that lean
So elegantly o'er the waters' brim
And show their blossoms trim.
Scarce can his clear and nimble eye-sight follow
The freaks, and dartings of the black-wing'd swallow,
Delighting much, to see it half at rest,
Dip so refreshingly its wings, and breast
'Gainst the smooth surface, and to mark anon,
The widening circles into nothing gone.

And now the sharp keel of his little boat
Comes up with ripple, and with easy float,
And glides into a bed of water lillies:
Broad leav'd are they and their white canopies
Are upward turn'd to catch the heavens' dew.
Near to a little island's point they grew;
Whence Calidore might have the goodliest view
Of this sweet spot of earth. The bowery shore
Went off in gentle windings to the hoar
And light blue mountains: but no breathing man
With a warm heart, and eye prepared to scan
Nature's clear beauty, could pass lightly by
Objects that look'd out so invitingly
On either side. These, gentle Calidore
Greeted, as he had known them long before.

The sidelong view of swelling leafiness,
Which the glad setting sun, in gold doth dress;
Whence ever, and anon the jay outsprings,
And scales upon the beauty of its wings.

The lonely turret, shatter'd, and outworn,
Stands venerably proud; too proud to mourn
Its long lost grandeur: fir trees grow around,
Aye dropping their hard fruit upon the ground.

The little chapel with the cross above
Upholding wreaths of ivy; the white dove,
That on the windows spreads his feathers light,
And seems from purple clouds to wing its flight.

Green tufted islands casting their soft shades
Across the lake; sequester'd leafy glades,
That through the dimness of their twilight show
Large dock leaves, spiral foxgloves, or the glow
Of the wild cat's eyes, or the silvery stems
Of delicate birch trees, or long grass which hems
A little brook. The youth had long been viewing
These pleasant things, and heaven was bedewing
The mountain flowers, when his glad senses caught
A trumpet's silver voice. Ah! it was fraught
With many joys for him: the warder's ken
Had found white coursers prancing in the glen:
Friends very dear to him he soon will see;
So pushes off his boat most eagerly,
And soon upon the lake he skims along,
Deaf to the nightingale's first under-song;
Nor minds he the white swans that dream so sweetly:
His spirit flies before him so completely.

And now he turns a jutting point of land,
Whence may be seen the castle gloomy, and grand:
Nor will a bee buzz round two swelling peaches,
Before the point of his light shallop reaches
Those marble steps that through the water dip:
Now over them he goes with hasty trip,
And scarcely stays to ope the folding doors:
Anon he leaps along the oaken floors
Of halls and corridors.

Delicious sounds! those little bright-eyed things
That float about the air on azure wings,
Had been less heartfelt by him than the clang
Of clattering hoofs; into the court he sprang,
Just as two noble steeds, and palfreys twain,
Were slanting out their necks with loosened rein;
While from beneath the threat'ning portcullis
They brought their happy burthens. What a kiss,
What gentle squeeze he gave each lady's hand!
How tremblingly their delicate ancles spann'd!
Into how sweet a trance his soul was gone,
While whisperings of affection
Made him delay to let their tender feet
Come to the earth; with an incline so sweet
From their low palfreys o'er his neck they bent:
And whether there were tears of languishment,
Or that the evening dew had pearl'd their tresses,
He feels a moisture on his cheek, and blesses
With lips that tremble, and with glistening eye
All the soft luxury
That nestled in his arms. A dimpled hand,
Fair as some wonder out of fairy land,
Hung from his shoulder like the drooping flowers
Of whitest Cassia, fresh from summer showers:
And this he fondled with his happy cheek
As if for joy he would no further seek;
When the kind voice of good Sir Clerimond
Came to his ear, like something from beyond
His present being: so he gently drew
His warm arms, thrilling now with pulses new,
From their sweet thrall, and forward gently bending,
Thank'd heaven that his joy was never ending;
While 'gainst his forehead he devoutly press'd
A hand heaven made to succour the distress'd;
A hand that from the world's bleak promontory
Had lifted Calidore for deeds of glory.

Amid the pages, and the torches' glare,
There stood a knight, patting the flowing hair
Of his proud horse's mane: he was withal
A man of elegance, and stature tall:
So that the waving of his plumes would be
High as the berries of a wild ash tree,
Or as the winged cap of Mercury.
His armour was so dexterously wrought
In shape, that sure no living man had thought
It hard, and heavy steel: but that indeed
It was some glorious form, some splendid weed,
In which a spirit new come from the skies
Might live, and show itself to human eyes.
'Tis the far-fam'd, the brave Sir Gondibert,
Said the good man to Calidore alert;
While the young warrior with a step of grace
Came up,--a courtly smile upon his face,
And mailed hand held out, ready to greet
The large-eyed wonder, and ambitious heat
Of the aspiring boy; who as he led
Those smiling ladies, often turned his head
To admire the visor arched so gracefully
Over a knightly brow; while they went by
The lamps that from the high-roof'd hall were pendent,
And gave the steel a shining quite transcendent.

Soon in a pleasant chamber they are seated;
The sweet-lipp'd ladies have already greeted
All the green leaves that round the window clamber,
To show their purple stars, and bells of amber.
Sir Gondibert has doff'd his shining steel,
Gladdening in the free, and airy feel
Of a light mantle; and while Clerimond
Is looking round about him with a fond,
And placid eye, young Calidore is burning
To hear of knightly deeds, and gallant spurning
Of all unworthiness; and how the strong of arm
Kept off dismay, and terror, and alarm
From lovely woman: while brimful of this,
He gave each damsel's hand so warm a kiss,
And had such manly ardour in his eye,
That each at other look'd half staringly;
And then their features started into smiles
Sweet as blue heavens o'er enchanted isles.

Softly the breezes from the forest came,
Softly they blew aside the taper's flame;
Clear was the song from Philomel's far bower;
Grateful the incense from the lime-tree flower;
Mysterious, wild, the far heard trumpet's tone;
Lovely the moon in ether, all alone:
Sweet too the converse of these happy mortals,
As that of busy spirits when the portals
Are closing in the west; or that soft humming
We hear around when Hesperus is coming.
Sweet be their sleep.         




TO SOME LADIES.


What though while the wonders of nature exploring,
  I cannot your light, mazy footsteps attend;
Nor listen to accents, that almost adoring,
  Bless Cynthia's face, the enthusiast's friend:

Yet over the steep, whence the mountain stream rushes,
  With you, kindest friends, in idea I rove;
Mark the clear tumbling crystal, its passionate gushes,
  Its spray that the wild flower kindly bedews.

Why linger you so, the wild labyrinth strolling?
  Why breathless, unable your bliss to declare?
Ah! you list to the nightingale's tender condoling,
  Responsive to sylphs, in the moon beamy air.

'Tis morn, and the flowers with dew are yet drooping,
  I see you are treading the verge of the sea:
And now! ah, I see it--you just now are stooping
  To pick up the keep-sake intended for me.

If a cherub, on pinions of silver descending,
  Had brought me a gem from the fret-work of heaven;
And smiles, with his star-cheering voice sweetly blending,
  The blessings of Tighe had melodiously given;

It had not created a warmer emotion
  Than the present, fair nymphs, I was blest with from you,
Than the shell, from the bright golden sands of the ocean
  Which the emerald waves at your feet gladly threw.

For, indeed, 'tis a sweet and peculiar pleasure,
  (And blissful is he who such happiness finds,)
To possess but a span of the hour of leisure,
  In elegant, pure, and aerial minds.




ON RECEIVING A CURIOUS SHELL, AND A COPY OF VERSES,
FROM THE SAME LADIES.


Hast thou from the caves of Golconda, a gem
  Pure as the ice-drop that froze on the mountain?
Bright as the humming-bird's green diadem,
  When it flutters in sun-beams that shine through a fountain?

Hast thou a goblet for dark sparkling wine?
  That goblet right heavy, and massy, and gold?
And splendidly mark'd with the story divine
  Of Armida the fair, and Rinaldo the bold?

Hast thou a steed with a mane richly flowing?
  Hast thou a sword that thine enemy's smart is?
Hast thou a trumpet rich melodies blowing?
  And wear'st thou the shield of the fam'd Britomartis?

What is it that hangs from thy shoulder, so brave,
  Embroidered with many a spring peering flower?
Is it a scarf that thy fair lady gave?
  And hastest thou now to that fair lady's bower?

Ah! courteous Sir Knight, with large joy thou art crown'd;
  Full many the glories that brighten thy youth!
I will tell thee my blisses, which richly abound
  In magical powers to bless, and to sooth.

On this scroll thou seest written in characters fair
  A sun-beamy tale of a wreath, and a chain;
And, warrior, it nurtures the property rare
  Of charming my mind from the trammels of pain.

This canopy mark: 'tis the work of a fay;
  Beneath its rich shade did King Oberon languish,
When lovely Titania was far, far away,
  And cruelly left him to sorrow, and anguish.

There, oft would he bring from his soft sighing lute
  Wild strains to which, spell-bound, the nightingales listened;
The wondering spirits of heaven were mute,
  And tears 'mong the dewdrops of morning oft glistened.

In this little dome, all those melodies strange,
  Soft, plaintive, and melting, for ever will sigh;
Nor e'er will the notes from their tenderness change;
  Nor e'er will the music of Oberon die.

So, when I am in a voluptuous vein,
  I pillow my head on the sweets of the rose,
And list to the tale of the wreath, and the chain,
  Till its echoes depart; then I sink to repose.

Adieu, valiant Eric! with joy thou art crown'd;
  Full many the glories that brighten thy youth,
I too have my blisses, which richly abound
  In magical powers, to bless and to sooth.




TO    


Hadst thou liv'd in days of old,
O what wonders had been told
Of thy lively countenance,
And thy humid eyes that dance
In the  midst of their own brightness;
In the very fane of lightness.
Over which thine eyebrows, leaning,
Picture out each lovely meaning:
In a dainty bend they lie,
Like two streaks across the sky,
Or the feathers from a crow,
Fallen on a bed of snow.
Of thy dark hair that extends
Into many graceful bends:
As the leaves of Hellebore
Turn to whence they sprung before.
And behind each ample curl
Peeps the richness of a pearl.
Downward too flows many a tress
With a glossy waviness;
Full, and round like globes that rise
From the censer to the skies
Through sunny air. Add too, the sweetness
Of thy honied voice; the neatness
Of thine ankle lightly turn'd:
With those beauties, scarce discrn'd,
Kept with such sweet privacy,
That they seldom meet the eye
Of the little loves that fly
Round about with eager pry.
Saving when, with freshening lave,
Thou dipp'st them in the taintless wave;
Like twin water lillies, born
In the coolness of the morn.
O, if thou hadst breathed then,
Now the Muses had been ten.
Couldst thou wish for lineage higher
Than twin sister of Thalia?
At least for ever, evermore,
Will I call the Graces four.

Hadst thou liv'd when chivalry
Lifted up her lance on high,
Tell me what thou wouldst have been?
Ah! I see the silver sheen
Of thy broidered, floating vest
Cov'ring half thine ivory breast;
Which, O heavens! I should see,
But that cruel destiny
Has placed a golden cuirass there;
Keeping secret what is fair.
Like sunbeams in a cloudlet nested
Thy locks in knightly casque are rested:
O'er which bend four milky plumes
Like the gentle lilly's blooms
Springing from a costly vase.
See with what a stately pace
Comes thine alabaster steed;
Servant of heroic deed!
O'er his loins, his trappings glow
Like the northern lights on snow.
Mount his back! thy sword unsheath!
Sign of the enchanter's death;
Bane of every wicked spell;
Silencer of dragon's yell.
Alas! thou this wilt never do:
Thou art an enchantress too,
And wilt surely never spill
Blood of those whose eyes can kill.




TO HOPE.


When by my solitary hearth I sit,
  And hateful thoughts enwrap my soul in gloom;
When no fair dreams before my "mind's eye" flit,
  And the bare heath of life presents no bloom;
    Sweet Hope, ethereal balm upon me shed,
    And wave thy silver pinions o'er my head.

Whene'er I wander, at the fall of night,
  Where woven boughs shut out the moon's bright ray,
Should sad Despondency my musings fright,
  And frown, to drive fair Cheerfulness away,
    Peep with the moon-beams through the leafy roof,
    And keep that fiend Despondence far aloof.

Should Disappointment, parent of Despair,
  Strive for her son to seize my careless heart;
When, like a cloud, he sits upon the air,
  Preparing on his spell-bound prey to dart:
    Chace him away, sweet Hope, with visage bright,
    And fright him as the morning frightens night!

Whene'er the fate of those I hold most dear
  Tells to my fearful breast a tale of sorrow,
O bright-eyed Hope, my morbid fancy cheer;
  Let me awhile thy sweetest comforts borrow:
    Thy heaven-born radiance around me shed,
    And wave thy silver pinions o'er my head!

Should e'er unhappy love my bosom pain,
  From cruel parents, or relentless fair;
O let me think it is not quite in vain
  To sigh out sonnets to the midnight air!
    Sweet Hope, ethereal balm upon me shed.
    And wave thy silver pinions o'er my head!

In the long vista of the years to roll,
  Let me not see our country's honour fade:
O let me see our land retain her soul,
  Her pride, her freedom; and not freedom's shade.
    From thy bright eyes unusual brightness shed--
    Beneath thy pinions canopy my head!

Let me not see the patriot's high bequest,
  Great Liberty! how great in plain attire!
With the base purple of a court oppress'd,
  Bowing her head, and ready to expire:
    But let me see thee stoop from heaven on wings
    That fill the skies with silver glitterings!

And as, in sparkling majesty, a star
  Gilds the bright summit of some gloomy cloud;
Brightening the half veil'd face of heaven afar:
  So, when dark thoughts my boding spirit shroud,
    Sweet Hope, celestial influence round me shed,
    Waving thy silver pinions o'er my head.

_February, 1815_.




IMITATION OF SPENSER.


  Now Morning from her orient chamber came,
  And her first footsteps touch'd a verdant hill;
  Crowning its lawny crest with amber flame,
  Silv'ring the untainted gushes of its rill;
  Which, pure from mossy beds, did down distill,
  And after parting beds of simple flowers,
  By many streams a little lake did fill,
  Which round its marge reflected woven bowers,
And, in its middle space, a sky that never lowers.

  There the king-fisher saw his plumage bright
  Vieing with fish of brilliant dye below;
  Whose silken fins, and golden scales' light
  Cast upward, through the waves, a ruby glow:
  There saw the swan his neck of arched snow,
  And oar'd himself along with majesty;
  Sparkled his jetty eyes; his feet did show
  Beneath the waves like Afric's ebony,
And on his back a fay reclined voluptuously.

  Ah! could I tell the wonders of an isle
  That in that fairest lake had placed been,
  I could e'en Dido of her grief beguile;
  Or rob from aged Lear his bitter teen:
  For sure so fair a place was never seen,
  Of all that ever charm'd romantic eye:
  It seem'd an emerald in the silver sheen
  Of the bright waters; or as when on high,
Through clouds of fleecy white, laughs the coerulean sky.

  And all around it dipp'd luxuriously
  Slopings of verdure through the glossy tide,
  Which, as it were in gentle amity,
  Rippled delighted up the flowery side;
  As if to glean the ruddy tears, it tried,
  Which fell profusely from the rose-tree stem!
  Haply it was the workings of its pride,
  In strife to throw upon the shore a gem
Outvieing all the buds in Flora's diadem.



Woman! when I behold thee flippant, vain,
  Inconstant, childish, proud, and full of fancies;
  Without that modest softening that enhances
The downcast eye, repentant of the pain
That its mild light creates to heal again:
  E'en then, elate, my spirit leaps, and prances,
  E'en then my soul with exultation dances
For that to love, so long, I've dormant lain:
But when I see thee meek, and kind, and tender,
  Heavens! how desperately do I adore
Thy winning graces;--to be thy defender
  I hotly burn--to be a Calidore--
A very Red Cross Knight--a stout Leander--
  Might I be loved by thee like these of yore.

Light feet, dark violet eyes, and parted hair;
  Soft dimpled hands, white neck, and creamy breast,
  Are things on which the dazzled senses rest
Till the fond, fixed eyes, forget they stare.
From such fine pictures, heavens! I cannot dare
  To turn my admiration, though unpossess'd
  They be of what is worthy,--though not drest
In lovely modesty, and virtues rare.
Yet these I leave as thoughtless as a lark;
  These lures I straight forget,--e'en ere I dine,
Or thrice my palate moisten: but when I mark
  Such charms with mild intelligences shine,
My ear is open like a greedy shark,
  To catch the tunings of a voice divine.

Ah! who can e'er forget so fair a being?
  Who can forget her half retiring sweets?
  God! she is like a milk-white lamb that bleats
For man's protection. Surely the All-seeing,
Who joys to see us with his gifts agreeing,
  Will never give him pinions, who intreats
  Such innocence to ruin,--who vilely cheats
A dove-like bosom. In truth there is no freeing
One's thoughts from such a beauty; when I hear
  A lay that once I saw her hand awake,
Her form seems floating palpable, and near;
  Had I e'er seen her from an arbour take
A dewy flower, oft would that hand appear,
  And o'er my eyes the trembling moisture shake.





EPISTLES


"Among the rest a shepheard (though but young
 Yet hartned to his pipe) with all the skill
 His few yeeres could, began to fit his quill."

Britannia's Pastorals.--BROWNE.




TO GEORGE FELTON MATHEW.


Sweet are the pleasures that to verse belong,
And doubly sweet a brotherhood in song;
Nor can remembrance, Mathew! bring to view
A fate more pleasing, a delight more true
Than that in which the brother Poets joy'd,
Who with combined powers, their wit employ'd
To raise a trophy to the drama's muses.
The thought of this great partnership diffuses
Over the genius loving heart, a feeling
Of all that's high, and great, and good, and healing.

Too partial friend! fain would I follow thee
Past each horizon of fine poesy;
Fain would I echo back each pleasant note
As o'er Sicilian seas, clear anthems float
'Mong the light skimming gondolas far parted,
Just when the sun his farewell beam has darted:
But 'tis impossible; far different cares
Beckon me sternly from soft "Lydian airs,"
And hold my faculties so long in thrall,
That I am oft in doubt whether at all
I shall again see Phoebus in the morning:
Or flush'd Aurora in the roseate dawning!
Or a white Naiad in a rippling stream;
Or a rapt seraph in a moonlight beam;
Or again witness what with thee I've seen,
The dew by fairy feet swept from the green,
After a night of some quaint jubilee
Which every elf and fay had come to see:
When bright processions took their airy march
Beneath the curved moon's triumphal arch.

But might I now each passing moment give
To the coy muse, with me she would not live
In this dark city, nor would condescend
'Mid contradictions her delights to lend.
Should e'er the fine-eyed maid to me be kind,
Ah! surely it must be whene'er I find
Some flowery spot, sequester'd, wild, romantic,
That often must have seen a poet frantic;
Where oaks, that erst the Druid knew, are growing,
And flowers, the glory of one day, are blowing;
Where the dark-leav'd laburnum's drooping clusters
Reflect athwart the stream their yellow lustres,
And intertwined the cassia's arms unite,
With its own drooping buds, but very white.
Where on one side are covert branches hung,
'Mong which the nightingales have always sung
In leafy quiet; where to pry, aloof,
Atween the pillars of the sylvan roof,
Would be to find where violet beds were nestling,
And where the bee with cowslip bells was wrestling.
There must be too a ruin dark, and gloomy,
To say "joy not too much in all that's bloomy."

Yet this is vain--O Mathew lend thy aid
To find a place where I may greet the maid--
Where we may soft humanity put on,
And sit, and rhyme and think on Chatterton;
And that warm-hearted Shakspeare sent to meet him
Four laurell'd spirits, heaven-ward to intreat him.
With reverence would we speak of all the sages
Who have left streaks of light athwart their ages:
And thou shouldst moralize on Milton's blindness,
And mourn the fearful dearth of human kindness
To those who strove with the bright golden wing
Of genius, to flap away each sting
Thrown by the pitiless world. We next could tell
Of those who in the cause of freedom fell:
Of our own Alfred, of Helvetian Tell;
Of him whose name to ev'ry heart's a solace,
High-minded and unbending William Wallace.
While to the rugged north our musing turns
We well might drop a tear for him, and Burns.

Felton! without incitements such as these,
How vain for me the niggard Muse to tease:
For thee, she will thy every dwelling grace,
And make "a sun-shine in a shady place:"
For thou wast once a flowret blooming wild,
Close to the source, bright, pure, and undefil'd,
Whence gush the streams of song: in happy hour
Came chaste Diana from her shady bower,
Just as the sun was from the east uprising;
And, as for him some gift she was devising,
Beheld thee, pluck'd thee, cast thee in the stream
To meet her glorious brother's greeting beam.
I marvel much that thou hast never told
How, from a flower, into a fish of gold
Apollo chang'd thee; how thou next didst seem
A black-eyed swan upon the widening stream;
And when thou first didst in that mirror trace
The placid features of a human face:
That thou hast never told thy travels strange.
And all the wonders of the mazy range
O'er pebbly crystal, and o'er golden sands;
Kissing thy daily food from Naiad's pearly hands.

_November, 1815_.




TO MY BROTHER GEORGE.

Full many a dreary hour have I past,
My brain bewilder'd, and my mind o'ercast
With heaviness; in seasons when I've thought
No spherey strains by me could e'er be caught
From the blue dome, though I to dimness gaze
On the far depth where sheeted lightning plays;
Or, on the wavy grass outstretch'd supinely,
Pry 'mong the stars, to strive to think divinely:
That I should never hear Apollo's song,
Though feathery clouds were floating all along
The purple west, and, two bright streaks between,
The golden lyre itself were dimly seen:
That the still murmur of the honey bee
Would never teach a rural song to me:
That the bright glance from beauty's eyelids slanting
Would never make a lay of mine enchanting,
Or warm my breast with ardour to unfold
Some tale of love and arms in time of old.

But there are times, when those that love the bay,
Fly from all sorrowing far, far away;
A sudden glow comes on them, nought they see
In water, earth, or air, but poesy.
It has been said, dear George, and true I hold it,
(For knightly Spenser to Libertas told it,)
That when a Poet is in such a trance,
In air he sees white coursers paw, and prance,
Bestridden of gay knights, in gay apparel,
Who at each other tilt in playful quarrel,
And what we, ignorantly, sheet-lightning call,
Is the swift opening of their wide portal,
When the bright warder blows his trumpet clear,
Whose tones reach nought on earth but Poet's ear.
When these enchanted portals open wide,
And through the light the horsemen swiftly glide,
The Poet's eye can reach those golden halls,
And view the glory of their festivals:
Their ladies fair, that in the distance seem
Fit for the silv'ring of a seraph's dream;
Their rich brimm'd goblets, that incessant run
Like the bright spots that move about the sun;
And, when upheld, the wine from each bright jar
Pours with the lustre of a falling star.
Yet further off, are dimly seen their bowers,
Of which, no mortal eye can reach the flowers;
And 'tis right just, for well Apollo knows
'Twould make the Poet quarrel with the rose.
All that's reveal'd from that far seat of blisses,
Is, the clear fountains' interchanging kisses.
As gracefully descending, light and thin,
Like silver streaks across a dolphin's fin,
When he upswimmeth from the coral caves.
And sports with half his tail above the waves.

These wonders strange be sees, and many more,
Whose head is pregnant with poetic lore.
Should he upon an evening ramble fare
With forehead to the soothing breezes bare,
Would he naught see but the dark, silent blue
With all its diamonds trembling through and through:
Or the coy moon, when in the waviness
Of whitest clouds she does her beauty dress,
And staidly paces higher up, and higher,
Like a sweet nun in holy-day attire?
Ah, yes! much more would start into his sight--
The revelries, and mysteries of night:
And should I ever see them, I will tell you
Such tales as needs must with amazement spell you.

These are the living pleasures of the bard:
But richer far posterity's award.
What does he murmur with his latest breath,
While his proud eye looks through the film of death?
"What though I leave this dull, and earthly mould,
Yet shall my spirit lofty converse hold
With after times.--The patriot shall feel
My stern alarum, and unsheath his steel;
Or, in the senate thunder out my numbers
To startle princes from their easy slumbers.
The sage will mingle with each moral theme
My happy thoughts sententious; he will teem
With lofty periods when my verses fire him,
And then I'll stoop from heaven to inspire him.
Lays have I left of such a dear delight
That maids will sing them on their bridal night.
Gay villagers, upon a morn of May
When they have tired their gentle limbs, with play,
And form'd a snowy circle on the grass,
And plac'd in midst of all that lovely lass
Who chosen is their queen,--with her fine head
Crowned with flowers purple, white, and red:
For there the lily, and the musk-rose, sighing,
Are emblems true of hapless lovers dying:
Between her breasts, that never yet felt trouble,
A bunch of violets full blown, and double,
Serenely sleep:--she from a casket takes
A little book,--and then a joy awakes
About each youthful heart,--with stifled cries,
And rubbing of white hands, and sparkling eyes:
For she's to read a tale of hopes, and fears;
One that I foster'd in my youthful years:
The pearls, that on each glist'ning circlet sleep,
Gush ever and anon with silent creep,
Lured by the innocent dimples. To sweet rest
Shall the dear babe, upon its mother's breast,
Be lull'd with songs of mine. Fair world, adieu!
Thy dales, and hills, are fading from my view:
Swiftly I mount, upon wide spreading pinions,
Far from the narrow bounds of thy dominions.
Full joy I feel, while thus I cleave the air,
That my soft verse will charm thy daughters fair,
And warm thy sons!" Ah, my dear friend and brother,
Could I, at once, my mad ambition smother,
For tasting joys like these, sure I should be
Happier, and dearer to society.
At times, 'tis true, I've felt relief from pain
When some bright thought has darted through my brain:
Through all that day I've felt a greater pleasure
Than if I'd brought to light a hidden treasure.
As to my sonnets, though none else should heed them,
I feel delighted, still, that you should read them.
Of late, too, I have had much calm enjoyment,
Stretch'd on the grass at my best lov'd employment
Of scribbling lines for you. These things I thought
While, in my face, the freshest breeze I caught.
E'en now I'm pillow'd on a bed of flowers
That crowns a lofty clift, which proudly towers
Above the ocean-waves. The stalks, and blades,
Chequer my tablet with their, quivering shades.
On one side is a field of drooping oats,
Through which the poppies show their scarlet coats
So pert and useless, that they bring to mind
The scarlet coats that pester human-kind.
And on the other side, outspread, is seen
Ocean's blue mantle streak'd with purple, and green.
Now 'tis I see a canvass'd ship, and now
Mark the bright silver curling round her prow.
I see the lark down-dropping to his nest.
And the broad winged sea-gull never at rest;
For when no more he spreads his feathers free,
His breast is dancing on the restless sea.
Now I direct my eyes into the west,
Which at this moment is in sunbeams drest:
Why westward turn? 'Twas but to say adieu!
'Twas but to kiss my hand, dear George, to you!

_August, 1816_.




TO CHARLES COWDEN CLARKE.


Oft have you seen a swan superbly frowning,
And with proud breast his own white shadow crowning;
He slants his neck beneath the waters bright
So silently, it seems a beam of light
Come from the galaxy: anon he sports,--
With outspread wings the Naiad Zephyr courts,
Or ruffles all the surface of the lake
In striving from its crystal face to take
Some diamond water drops, and them to treasure
In milky nest, and sip them off at leisure.
But not a moment can he there insure them,
Nor to such downy rest can he allure them;
For down they rush as though they would be free,
And drop like hours into eternity.
Just like that bird am I in loss of time,
Whene'er I venture on the stream of rhyme;
With shatter'd boat, oar snapt, and canvass rent,
I slowly sail, scarce knowing my intent;
Still scooping up the water with my fingers,
In which a trembling diamond never lingers.

By this, friend Charles, you may full plainly see
Why I have never penn'd a line to thee:
Because my thoughts were never free, and clear,
And little fit to please a classic ear;
Because my wine was of too poor a savour
For one whose palate gladdens in the flavour
Of sparkling Helicon:--small good it were
To take him to a desert rude, and bare.
Who had on Baiae's shore reclin'd at ease,
While Tasso's page was floating in a breeze
That gave soft music from Armida's bowers,
Mingled with fragrance from her rarest flowers:
Small good to one who had by Mulla's stream
Fondled the maidens with the breasts of cream;
Who had beheld Belphoebe in a brook,
And lovely Una in a leafy nook,
And Archimago leaning o'er his book:
Who had of all that's sweet tasted, and seen,
From silv'ry ripple, up to beauty's queen;
From the sequester'd haunts of gay Titania,
To the blue dwelling of divine Urania:
One, who, of late, had ta'en sweet forest walks
With him who elegantly chats, and talks--
The wrong'd Libert as,--who has told you stories
Of laurel chaplets, and Apollo's glories;
Of troops chivalrous prancing; through a city,
And tearful ladies made for love, and pity:
With many else which I have never known.
Thus have I thought; and days on days have flown
Slowly, or rapidly--unwilling still
For you to try my dull, unlearned quill.
Nor should I now, but that I've known you long;
That you first taught me all the sweets of song:
The grand, the sweet, the terse, the free, the fine;
What swell'd with pathos, and what right divine:
Spenserian vowels that elope with ease,
And float along like birds o'er summer seas;
Miltonian storms, and more, Miltonian tenderness;
Michael in arms, and more, meek Eve's fair slenderness.
Who read for me the sonnet swelling loudly
Up to its climax and then dying proudly?
Who found for me the grandeur of the ode,
Growing, like Atlas, stronger from its load?
Who let me taste that more than cordial dram,
The sharp, the rapier-pointed epigram?
Shew'd me that epic was of all the king,
Round, vast, and spanning all like Saturn's ring?
You too upheld the veil from Clio's beauty,
And pointed out the patriot's stern duty;
The might of Alfred, and the shaft of Tell;
The hand of Brutus, that so grandly fell
Upon a tyrant's head. Ah! had I never seen,
Or known your kindness, what might I have been?
What my enjoyments in my youthful years,
Bereft of all that now my life endears?
And can I e'er these benefits forget?
And can I e'er repay the friendly debt?
No, doubly no;--yet should these rhymings please,
I shall roll on the grass with two-fold ease:
For I have long time been my fancy feeding
With hopes that you would one day think the reading
Of my rough verses not an hour misspent;
Should it e'er be so, what a rich content!
Some weeks have pass'd since last I saw the spires
In lucent Thames reflected:--warm desires
To see the sun o'er peep the eastern dimness,
And morning shadows streaking into slimness
Across the lawny fields, and pebbly water;
To mark the time as they grow broad, and shorter;
To feel the air that plays about the hills,
And sips its freshness from the little rills;
To see high, golden corn wave in the light
When Cynthia smiles upon a summer's night,
And peers among the cloudlet's jet and white,
As though she were reclining in a bed
Of bean blossoms, in heaven freshly shed.
No sooner had I stepp'd into these pleasures
Than I began to think of rhymes and measures:
The air that floated by me seem'd to say
"Write! thou wilt never have a better day."
And so I did. When many lines I'd written,
Though with their grace I was not oversmitten,
Yet, as my hand was warm, I thought I'd better
Trust to my feelings, and write you a letter.
Such an attempt required an inspiration
Of a peculiar sort,--a consummation;--
Which, had I felt, these scribblings might have been
Verses from which the soul would never wean:
But many days have past since last my heart
Was warm'd luxuriously by divine Mozart;
By Arne delighted, or by Handel madden'd;
Or by the song of Erin pierc'd and sadden'd:
What time you were before the music sitting,
And the rich notes to each sensation fitting.
Since I have walk'd with you through shady lanes
That freshly terminate in open plains,
And revel'd in a chat that ceased not
When at night-fall among your books we got:
No, nor when supper came, nor after that,--
Nor when reluctantly I took my hat;
No, nor till cordially you shook my hand
Mid-way between our homes:--your accents bland
Still sounded in my ears, when I no more
Could hear your footsteps touch the grav'ly floor.
Sometimes I lost them, and then found again;
You chang'd the footpath for the grassy plain.
In those still moments I have wish'd you joys
That well you know to honour:--"Life's very toys
With him," said I, "will take a pleasant charm;
It cannot be that ought will work him harm."
These thoughts now come o'er me with all their might:--
Again I shake your hand,--friend Charles, good night.

_September, 1816_.





SONNETS




I. TO MY BROTHER GEORGE.


Many the wonders I this day have seen:
  The sun, when first he kist away the tears
  That fill'd the eyes of morn;--the laurel'd peers
Who from the feathery gold of evening lean:--
The ocean with its vastness, its blue green,
  Its ships, its rocks, its caves, its hopes, its fears,--
  Its voice mysterious, which whoso hears
Must think on what will be, and what has been.
E'en now, dear George, while this for you I write,
  Cynthia is from her silken curtains peeping
So scantly, that it seems her bridal night,
  And she her half-discover'd revels keeping.
But what, without the social thought of thee,
Would be the wonders of the sky and sea?




II. TO      


Had I a man's fair form, then might my sighs
  Be echoed swiftly through that ivory shell,
  Thine ear, and find thy gentle heart; so well
Would passion arm me for the enterprize:
But ah! I am no knight whose foeman dies;
  No cuirass glistens on my bosom's swell;
  I am no happy shepherd of the dell
Whose lips have trembled with a maiden's eyes;
Yet must I dote upon thee,--call thee sweet.
  Sweeter by far than Hybla's honied roses
    When steep'd in dew rich to intoxication.
Ah! I will taste that dew, for me 'tis meet,
  And when the moon her pallid face discloses,
    I'll gather some by spells, and incantation.




III. _Written on the day that Mr. Leigh Hunt left Prison._


What though, for showing truth to flatter'd state
  Kind Hunt was shut in prison, yet has he,
  In his immortal spirit, been as free
As the sky-searching lark, and as elate.
Minion of grandeur! think you he did wait?
  Think you he nought but prison walls did see,
  Till, so unwilling, thou unturn'dst the key?
Ah, no! far happier, nobler was his fate!
In Spenser's halls he strayed, and bowers fair,
  Culling enchanted flowers; and he flew
With daring Milton through the fields of air:
  To regions of his own his genius true
Took happy flights. Who shall his fame impair
  When thou art dead, and all thy wretched crew?




IV.


How many bards gild the lapses of time!
  A few of them have ever been the food
  Of my delighted fancy,--I could brood
Over their beauties, earthly, or sublime:
And often, when I sit me down to rhyme,
  These will in throngs before my mind intrude:
  But no confusion, no disturbance rude
Do they occasion; 'tis a pleasing chime.
So the unnumber'd sounds that evening store;
  The songs of birds--the whisp'ring of the leaves--
The voice of waters--the great bell that heaves
  With solemn sound,--and thousand others more,
That distance of recognizance bereaves,
  Make pleasing music, and not wild uproar.




V. _To a Friend who sent me some Roses._


As late I rambled in the happy fields,
  What time the sky-lark shakes the tremulous dew
  From his lush clover covert;--when anew
Adventurous knights take up their dinted shields:
I saw the sweetest flower wild nature yields,
  A fresh-blown musk-rose; 'twas the first that threw
  Its sweets upon the summer: graceful it grew
As is the wand that queen Titania wields.
And, as I feasted on its fragrancy,
  I thought the garden-rose it far excell'd:
But when, O Wells! thy roses came to me
  My sense with their deliciousness was spell'd:
Soft voices had they, that with tender plea
  Whisper'd of peace, and truth, and friendliness unquell'd.




VI. To G. A. W.


Nymph of the downward smile, and sidelong glance,
  In what diviner moments of the day
  Art thou most lovely? When gone far astray
Into the labyrinths of sweet utterance?
Or when serenely wand'ring in a trance
  Of sober thought? Or when starting away,
  With careless robe, to meet the morning ray,
Thou spar'st the flowers in thy mazy dance?
Haply 'tis when thy ruby lips part sweetly,
  And so remain, because thou listenest:
But thou to please wert nurtured so completely
  That I can never tell what mood is best.
I shall as soon pronounce which grace more neatly
  Trips it before Apollo than the rest.




VII.


O Solitude! if I must with thee dwell,
  Let it not be among the jumbled heap
  Of murky buildings; climb with me the steep,--
Nature's observatory--whence the dell,
Its flowery slopes, its river's crystal swell,
  May seem a span; let me thy vigils keep
  'Mongst boughs pavillion'd, where the deer's swift leap
Startles the wild bee from the fox-glove bell.
But though I'll gladly trace these scenes with thee,
  Yet the sweet converse of an innocent mind,
Whose words are images of thoughts refin'd,
  Is my soul's pleasure; and it sure must be
Almost the highest bliss of human-kind,
  When to thy haunts two kindred spirits flee.




VIII. TO MY BROTHERS.


Small, busy flames play through the fresh laid coals,
  And their faint cracklings o'er our silence creep
  Like whispers of the household gods that keep
A gentle empire o'er fraternal souls.
And while, for rhymes, I search around the poles,
  Your eyes are fix'd, as in poetic sleep,
  Upon the lore so voluble and deep,
That aye at fall of night our care condoles.
This is your birth-day Tom, and I rejoice
  That thus it passes smoothly, quietly.
Many such eves of gently whisp'ring noise
  May we together pass, and calmly try
What are this world's true joys,--ere the great voice,
  From its fair face, shall bid our spirits fly.

_November 18, 1816._




IX.


Keen, fitful gusts are whisp'ring here and there
  Among the bushes half leafless, and dry;
  The stars look very cold about the sky,
And I have many miles on foot to fare.
Yet feel I little of the cool bleak air,
  Or of the dead leaves rustling drearily,
  Or of those silver lamps that burn on high,
Or of the distance from home's pleasant lair:
For I am brimfull of the friendliness
  That in a little cottage I have found;
Of fair-hair'd Milton's eloquent distress,
  And all his love for gentle Lycid drown'd;
Of lovely Laura in her light green dress,
  And faithful Petrarch gloriously crown'd.




X.


To one who has been long in city pent,
  'Tis very sweet to look into the fair
  And open face of heaven,--to breathe a prayer
Full in the smile of the blue firmament.
Who is more happy, when, with hearts content,
  Fatigued he sinks into some pleasant lair
  Of wavy grass, and reads a debonair
And gentle tale of love and languishment?
Returning home at evening, with an ear
  Catching the notes of Philomel,--an eye
Watching the sailing cloudlet's bright career,
  He mourns that day so soon has glided by:
E'en like the passage of an angel's tear
  That falls through the clear ether silently.




XI. _On first looking into Chapman's Homer._


Much have I traveled in the realms of gold,
  And many goodly states and kingdoms seen;
  Round many western islands have I been
Which bards in fealty to Apollo hold.
Oft of one wide expanse had I been told
  That deep-brow'd Homer ruled as his demesne;
  Yet did I never breathe its pure serene
Till I heard Chapman speak out loud and bold:
Then felt I like some watcher of the skies
  When a new planet swims into his ken;
Or like stout Cortez when with eagle eyes
  He star'd at the Pacific--and all his men
Look'd at each other with a wild surmise--
  Silent, upon a peak in Darien.




XII. _On leaving some Friends at an early Hour._


Give me a golden pen, and let me lean
  On heap'd up flowers, in regions clear, and far;
  Bring me a tablet whiter than a star,
Or hand of hymning angel, when 'tis seen
The silver strings of heavenly harp atween:
  And let there glide by many a pearly car,
  Pink robes, and wavy hair, and diamond jar,
And half discovered wings, and glances keen.
The while let music wander round my ears.
  And as it reaches each delicious ending,
    Let me write down a line of glorious tone,
And full of many wonders of the spheres:
  For what a height my spirit is contending!
    'Tis not content so soon to be alone.




XIII. ADDRESSED TO HAYDON.


Highmindedness, a jealousy for good,
  A loving-kindness for the great man's fame,
  Dwells here and there with people of no name,
In noisome alley, and in pathless wood:
And where we think the truth least understood,
  Oft may be found a "singleness of aim,"
  That ought to frighten into hooded shame
A money mong'ring, pitiable brood.
How glorious this affection for the cause
  Of stedfast genius, toiling gallantly!
What when a stout unbending champion awes
  Envy, and Malice to their native sty?
Unnumber'd souls breathe out a still applause,
  Proud to behold him in his country's eye.




XIV. ADDRESSED TO THE SAME.


Great spirits now on earth are sojourning;
  He of the cloud, the cataract, the lake,
  Who on Helvellyn's summit, wide awake,
Catches his freshness from Archangel's wing:
He of the rose, the violet, the spring.
  The social smile, the chain for Freedom's sake:
  And lo!--whose stedfastness would never take
A meaner sound than Raphael's whispering.
And other spirits there are standing apart
  Upon the forehead of the age to come;
These, these will give the world another heart,
  And other pulses. Hear ye not the hum
Of mighty workings?------------
  Listen awhile ye nations, and be dumb.




XV. _On the Grasshopper and Cricket._


The poetry of earth is never dead:
  When all the birds are faint with the hot sun,
  And hide in cooling trees, a voice will run
From hedge to hedge about the new-mown mead;
That is the Grasshopper's--he takes the lead
  In summer luxury,--he has never done
  With his delights; for when tired out with fun
He rests at ease beneath some pleasant weed.
The poetry of earth is ceasing never:
  On a lone winter evening, when the frost
    Has wrought a silence, from the stove there shrills
The Cricket's song, in warmth increasing ever,
  And seems to one in drowsiness half lost,
    The Grasshopper's among some grassy hills.

_December 30, 1816._




XVI. TO KOSCIUSKO.


Good Kosciusko, thy great name alone
  Is a full harvest whence to reap high feeling;
  It comes upon us like the glorious pealing
Of the wide spheres--an everlasting tone.
And now it tells me, that in worlds unknown,
  The names of heroes, burst from clouds concealing,
  And changed to harmonies, for ever stealing
Through cloudless blue, and round each silver throne.
It tells me too, that on a happy day,
  When some good spirit walks upon the earth,
  Thy name with Alfred's, and the great of yore
Gently commingling, gives tremendous birth
To a loud hymn, that sounds far, far away
  To where the great God lives for evermore.




XVII.


Happy is England! I could be content
  To see no other verdure than its own;
  To feel no other breezes than are blown
Through its tall woods with high romances blent:
Yet do I sometimes feel a languishment
  For skies Italian, and an inward groan
  To sit upon an Alp as on a throne,
And half forget what world or worldling meant.
Happy is England, sweet her artless daughters;
  Enough their simple loveliness for me,
    Enough their whitest arms in silence clinging:
  Yet do I often warmly burn to see
    Beauties of deeper glance, and hear their singing,
And float with them about the summer waters.




SLEEP AND POETRY


"As I lay in my bed slepe full unmete
Was unto me, but why that I ne might
Rest I ne wist, for there n'as erthly wight
[As I suppose] had more of hertis ese
Than I, for I n'ad sicknesse nor disese."

CHAUCER.


What is more gentle than a wind in summer?
What is more soothing than the pretty hummer
That stays one moment in an open flower,
And buzzes cheerily from bower to bower?
What is more tranquil than a musk-rose blowing
In a green island, far from all men's knowing?
More healthful than the leafiness of dales?
More secret than a nest of nightingales?
More serene than Cordelia's countenance?
More full of visions than a high romance?
What, but thee Sleep? Soft closer of our eyes!
Low murmurer of tender lullabies!
Light hoverer around our happy pillows!
Wreather of poppy buds, and weeping willows!
Silent entangler of a beauty's tresses!
Most happy listener! when the morning blesses
Thee for enlivening all the cheerful eyes
That glance so brightly at the new sun-rise.

But what is higher beyond thought than thee?
Fresher than berries of a mountain tree?
More strange, more beautiful, more smooth, more regal,
Than wings of swans, than doves, than dim-seen eagle?
What is it? And to what shall I compare it?
It has a glory, and nought else can share it:
The thought thereof is awful, sweet, and holy,
Chacing away all worldliness and folly;
Coming sometimes like fearful claps of thunder,
Or the low rumblings earth's regions under;
And sometimes like a gentle whispering
Of all the secrets of some wond'rous thing
That breathes about us in the vacant air;
So that we look around with prying stare,
Perhaps to see shapes of light, aerial lymning,
And catch soft floatings from a faint-heard hymning;
To see the laurel wreath, on high suspended,
That is to crown our name when life is ended.
Sometimes it gives a glory to the voice,
And from the heart up-springs, rejoice! rejoice!
Sounds which will reach the Framer of all things,
And die away in ardent mutterings.

No one who once the glorious sun has seen,
And all the clouds, and felt his bosom clean
For his great Maker's presence, but must know
What 'tis I mean, and feel his being glow:
Therefore no insult will I give his spirit,
By telling what he sees from native merit.

O Poesy! for thee I hold my pen
That am not yet a glorious denizen
Of thy wide heaven--Should I rather kneel
Upon some mountain-top until I feel
A glowing splendour round about me hung,
And echo back the voice of thine own tongue?
O Poesy! for thee I grasp my pen
That am not yet a glorious denizen
Of thy wide heaven; yet, to my ardent prayer,
Yield from thy sanctuary some clear air,
Smoothed for intoxication by the breath
Of flowering bays, that I may die a death
Of luxury, and my young spirit follow
The morning sun-beams to the great Apollo
Like a fresh sacrifice; or, if I can bear
The o'erwhelming sweets, 'twill bring to me the fair
Visions of all places: a bowery nook
Will be elysium--an eternal book
Whence I may copy many a lovely saying
About the leaves, and flowers--about the playing
Of nymphs in woods, and fountains; and the shade
Keeping a silence round a sleeping maid;
And many a verse from so strange influence
That we must ever wonder how, and whence
It came. Also imaginings will hover
Round my fire-side, and haply there discover
Vistas of solemn beauty, where I'd wander
In happy silence, like the clear meander
Through its lone vales; and where I found a spot
Of awfuller shade, or an enchanted grot,
Or a green hill o'erspread with chequered dress
Of flowers, and fearful from its loveliness,
Write on my tablets all that was permitted,
All that was for our human senses fitted.
Then the events of this wide world I'd seize
Like a strong giant, and my spirit teaze
Till at its shoulders it should proudly see
Wings to find out an immortality.

Stop and consider! life is but a day;
A fragile dew-drop on its perilous way
From a tree's summit; a poor Indian's sleep
While his boat hastens to the monstrous steep
Of Montmorenci. Why so sad a moan?
Life is the rose's hope while yet unblown;
The reading of an ever-changing tale;
The light uplifting of a maiden's veil;
A pigeon tumbling in clear summer air;
A laughing school-boy, without grief or care,
Riding the springy branches of an elm.

O for ten years, that I may overwhelm
Myself in poesy; so I may do the deed
That my own soul has to itself decreed.
Then will I pass the countries that I see
In long perspective, and continually
Taste their pure fountains. First the realm I'll pass
Of Flora, and old Pan: sleep in the grass,
Feed upon apples red, and strawberries,
And choose each pleasure that my fancy sees;
Catch the white-handed nymphs in shady places,
To woo sweet kisses from averted faces,--
Play with their fingers, touch their shoulders white
Into a pretty shrinking with a bite
As hard as lips can make it: till agreed,
A lovely tale of human life we'll read.
And one will teach a tame dove how it best
May fan the cool air gently o'er my rest;
Another, bending o'er her nimble tread,
Will set a green robe floating round her head,
And still will dance with ever varied case,
Smiling upon the flowers and the trees:
Another will entice me on, and on
Through almond blossoms and rich cinnamon;
Till in the bosom of a leafy world
We rest in silence, like two gems upcurl'd
In the recesses of a pearly shell.

And can I ever bid these joys farewell?
Yes, I must pass them for a nobler life,
Where I may find the agonies, the strife
Of human hearts: for lo! I see afar,
O'er sailing the blue cragginess, a car
And steeds with streamy manes--the charioteer
Looks out upon the winds with glorious fear:
And now the numerous tramplings quiver lightly
Along a huge cloud's ridge; and now with sprightly
Wheel downward come they into fresher skies,
Tipt round with silver from the sun's bright eyes.
Still downward with capacious whirl they glide,
And now I see them on a green-hill's side
In breezy rest among the nodding stalks.
The charioteer with wond'rous gesture talks
To the trees and mountains; and there soon appear
Shapes of delight, of mystery, and fear,
Passing along before a dusky space
Made by some mighty oaks: as they would chase
Some ever-fleeting music on they sweep.
Lo! how they murmur, laugh, and smile, and weep:
Some with upholden hand and mouth severe;
Some with their faces muffled to the ear
Between their arms; some, clear in youthful bloom,
Go glad and smilingly, athwart the gloom;
Some looking back, and some with upward gaze;
Yes, thousands in a thousand different ways
Flit onward--now a lovely wreath of girls
Dancing their sleek hair into tangled curls;
And now broad wings. Most awfully intent
The driver, of those steeds is forward bent,
And seems to listen: O that I might know
All that he writes with such a hurrying glow.

The visions all are fled--the car is fled
Into the light of heaven, and in their stead
A sense of real things comes doubly strong,
And, like a muddy stream, would bear along
My soul to nothingness: but I will strive
Against all doublings, and will keep alive
The thought of that same chariot, and the strange
Journey it went.

            Is there so small a range
In the present strength of manhood, that the high
Imagination cannot freely fly
As she was wont of old? prepare her steeds,
Paw up against the light, and do strange deeds
Upon the clouds? Has she not shewn us all?
From the clear space of ether, to the small
Breath of new buds unfolding? From the meaning
Of Jove's large eye-brow, to the tender greening
Of April meadows? Here her altar shone,
E'en in this isle; and who could paragon
The fervid choir that lifted up a noise
Of harmony, to where it aye will poise
Its mighty self of convoluting sound,
Huge as a planet, and like that roll round,
Eternally around a dizzy void?
Ay, in those days the Muses were nigh cloy'd
With honors; nor had any other care
Than to sing out and sooth their wavy hair.

Could all this be forgotten? Yes, a schism
Nurtured by foppery and barbarism,
Made great Apollo blush for this his land.
Men were thought wise who could not understand
His glories: with a puling infant's force
They sway'd about upon a rocking horse,
And thought it Pegasus. Ah dismal soul'd!
The winds of heaven blew, the ocean roll'd
Its gathering waves--ye felt it not. The blue
Bared its eternal bosom, and the dew
Of summer nights collected still to make
The morning precious: beauty was awake!
Why were ye not awake? But ye were dead
To things ye knew not of,--were closely wed
To musty laws lined out with wretched rule
And compass vile: so that ye taught a school
Of dolts to smooth, inlay, and clip, and fit,
Till, like the certain wands of Jacob's wit,
Their verses tallied. Easy was the task:
A thousand handicraftsmen wore the mask
Of Poesy. Ill-fated, impious race!
That blasphemed the bright Lyrist to his face,
And did not know it,--no, they went about,
Holding a poor, decrepid standard out
Mark'd with most flimsy mottos, and in large
The name of one Boileau!

                              O ye whose charge
It is to hover round our pleasant hills!
Whose congregated majesty so fills
My boundly reverence, that I cannot trace
Your hallowed names, in this unholy place,
So near those common folk; did not their shames
Affright you? Did our old lamenting Thames
Delight you? Did ye never cluster round
Delicious Avon, with a mournful sound,
And weep? Or did ye wholly bid adieu
To regions where no more the laurel grew?
Or did ye stay to give a welcoming
To some lone spirits who could proudly sing
Their youth away, and die? 'Twas even so:
But let me think away those times of woe:
Now 'tis a fairer season; ye have breathed
Rich benedictions o'er us; ye have wreathed
Fresh garlands: for sweet music has been heard
In many places;--some has been upstirr'd
From out its crystal dwelling in a lake,
By a swan's ebon bill; from a thick brake,
Nested and quiet in a valley mild,
Bubbles a pipe; fine sounds are floating wild
About the earth: happy are ye and glad.

These things are doubtless: yet in truth we've had
Strange thunders from the potency of song;
Mingled indeed with what is sweet and strong,
From majesty: but in clear truth the themes
Are ugly clubs, the Poets Polyphemes
Disturbing the grand sea. A drainless shower
Of light is poesy; 'tis the supreme of power;
'Tis might half slumb'ring on its own right arm.
The very archings of her eye-lids charm
A thousand willing agents to obey,
And still she governs with the mildest sway:
But strength alone though of the Muses born
Is like a fallen angel: trees uptorn,
Darkness, and worms, and shrouds, and sepulchres
Delight it; for it feeds upon the burrs,
And thorns of life; forgetting the great end
Of poesy, that it should be a friend
To sooth the cares, and lift the thoughts of man.

  Yet I rejoice: a myrtle fairer than
E'er grew in Paphos, from the bitter weeds
Lifts its sweet head into the air, and feeds
A silent space with ever sprouting green.
All tenderest birds there find a pleasant screen,
Creep through the shade with jaunty fluttering,
Nibble the little cupped flowers and sing.
Then let us clear away the choaking thorns
From round its gentle stem; let the young fawns,
Yeaned in after times, when we are flown,
Find a fresh sward beneath it, overgrown
With simple flowers: let there nothing be
More boisterous than a lover's bended knee;
Nought more ungentle than the placid look
Of one who leans upon a closed book;
Nought more untranquil than the grassy slopes
Between two hills. All hail delightful hopes!
As she was wont, th' imagination
Into most lovely labyrinths will be gone,
And they shall be accounted poet kings
Who simply tell the most heart-easing things.
O may these joys be ripe before I die.

Will not some say that I presumptuously
Have spoken? that from hastening disgrace
'Twere better far to hide my foolish face?
That whining boyhood should with reverence bow
Ere the dread thunderbolt could reach? How!
If I do hide myself, it sure shall be
In the very fane, the light of Poesy:
If I do fall, at least I will be laid
Beneath the silence of a poplar shade;
And over me the grass shall be smooth shaven;
And there shall be a kind memorial graven.
But oft' Despondence! miserable bane!
They should not know thee, who athirst to gain
A noble end, are thirsty every hour.
What though I am not wealthy in the dower
Of spanning wisdom; though I do not know
The shiftings of the mighty winds, that blow
Hither and thither all the changing thoughts
Of man: though no great minist'ring reason sorts
Out the dark mysteries of human souls
To clear conceiving: yet there ever rolls
A vast idea before me, and I glean
Therefrom my liberty; thence too I've seen
The end and aim of Poesy. 'Tis clear
As any thing most true; as that the year
Is made of the four seasons--manifest
As a large cross, some old cathedral's crest,
Lifted to the white clouds. Therefore should I
Be but the essence of deformity,
A coward, did my very eye-lids wink
At speaking out what I have dared to think.
Ah! rather let me like a madman run
Over some precipice; let the hot sun
Melt my Dedalian wings, and drive me down
Convuls'd and headlong! Stay! an inward frown
Of conscience bids me be more calm awhile.
An ocean dim, sprinkled with many an isle,
Spreads awfully before me. How much toil!
How many days! what desperate turmoil!
Ere I can have explored its widenesses.
Ah, what a task! upon my bended knees,
I could unsay those--no, impossible!
Impossible!

                 For sweet relief I'll dwell
On humbler thoughts, and let this strange assay
Begun in gentleness die so away.
E'en now all tumult from my bosom fades:
I turn full hearted to the friendly aids
That smooth the path of honour; brotherhood,
And friendliness the nurse of mutual good.
The hearty grasp that sends a pleasant sonnet
Into the brain ere one can think upon it;
The silence when some rhymes are coming out;
And when they're come, the very pleasant rout:
The message certain to be done to-morrow.
'Tis perhaps as well that it should be to borrow
Some precious book from out its snug retreat,
To cluster round it when we next shall meet.
Scarce can I scribble on; for lovely airs
Are fluttering round the room like doves in pairs;
Many delights of that glad day recalling,
When first my senses caught their tender falling.
And with these airs come forms of elegance
Stooping their shoulders o'er a horse's prance,
Careless, and grand--fingers soft and round
Parting luxuriant curls;--and the swift bound
Of Bacchus from his chariot, when his eye
Made Ariadne's cheek look blushingly.
Thus I remember all the pleasant flow
Of words at opening a portfolio.

Things such as these are ever harbingers
To trains of peaceful images: the stirs
Of a swan's neck unseen among the rushes:
A linnet starting all about the bushes:
A butterfly, with golden wings broad parted,
Nestling a rose, convuls'd as though it smarted
With over pleasure--many, many more,
Might I indulge at large in all my store
Of luxuries: yet I must not forget
Sleep, quiet with his poppy coronet:
For what there may be worthy in these rhymes
I partly owe to him: and thus, the chimes
Of friendly voices had just given place
To as sweet a silence, when I 'gan retrace
The pleasant day, upon a couch at ease.
It was a poet's house who keeps the keys
Of pleasure's temple. Round about were hung
The glorious features of the bards who sung
In other ages--cold and sacred busts
Smiled at each other. Happy he who trusts
To clear Futurity his darling fame!
Then there were fauns and satyrs taking aim
At swelling apples with a frisky leap
And reaching fingers, 'mid a luscious heap
Of vine leaves. Then there rose to view a fane
Of liny marble, and thereto a train
Of nymphs approaching fairly o'er the sward:
One, loveliest, holding her white band toward
The dazzling sun-rise: two sisters sweet
Bending their graceful figures till they meet
Over the trippings of a little child:
And some are hearing, eagerly, the wild
Thrilling liquidity of dewy piping.
See, in another picture, nymphs are wiping
Cherishingly Diana's timorous limbs;--
A fold of lawny mantle dabbling swims
At the bath's edge, and keeps a gentle motion
With the subsiding crystal: as when ocean
Heaves calmly its broad swelling smoothiness o'er
Its rocky marge, and balances once more
The patient weeds; that now unshent by foam
Feel all about their undulating home.

Sappho's meek head was there half smiling down
At nothing; just as though the earnest frown
Of over thinking had that moment gone
From off her brow, and left her all alone.

Great Alfred's too, with anxious, pitying eyes,
As if he always listened to the sighs
Of the goaded world; and Kosciusko's worn
By horrid suffrance--mightily forlorn.

Petrarch, outstepping from the shady green,
Starts at the sight of Laura; nor can wean
His eyes from her sweet face. Most happy they!
For over them was seen a free display
Of out-spread wings, and from between them shone
The face of Poesy: from off her throne
She overlook'd things that I scarce could tell.
The very sense of where I was might well
Keep Sleep aloof: but more than that there came
Thought after thought to nourish up the flame
Within my breast; so that the morning light
Surprised me even from a sleepless night;
And up I rose refresh'd, and glad, and gay,
Resolving to begin that very day
These lines; and howsoever they be done,
I leave them as a father does his son.


_Finis_.





Corrections

Three spelling errors were corrected for the Project Gutenberg edition.
The original lines appeared in the 1817 edition as follows:


To    
Line 10:  Like to streaks across the sky,


To Charles Cowden Clarke
Line 82:  Of my rough verses not an hour mispent;


Sleep and Poetry
Line 181:  Could all this be forgotten? Yes, a scism




THE POETRY OF RAINER MARIA RILKE

    eisi gar oun, oi en tais psuchais kuousin

                                     Plato

The supreme problem of every age is that of finding its consummate
artistic expression. Before this problem every other remains of
secondary importance. History defines and directs its physical course,
science cooperates in the achievement of its material aims, but Art
alone gives to the age its spiritual physiognomy, its ultimate and
lasting expression.

The process of Art is on the one hand sensuous, the conception having
for its basis the fineness of organization of the senses; and on the
other hand it is severely scientific, the value of the creation being
dependent upon the craftsmanship, the mastery over the tool, the
technique.

Art, like Nature, its great and only reservoir for all time past and all
time to come, ever strives for elimination and selection. It is severe
and aristocratic in the application of its laws and impervious to appeal
to serve other than its own aims. Its purpose is the symbolization of
Life. In its sanctum there reigns the silence of vast accomplishment,
the serene, final, and imperturbable solitude which is the ultimate
criterion of all great things created.

To speak of Poetry is to speak of the most subtle, the most delicate,
and the most accurate instrument by which to measure Life.

Poetry is reality's essence visioned and made manifest by one endowed
with a perception acutely sensitive to sound, form, and colour, and
gifted with a power to shape into rhythmic and rhymed verbal symbols the
reaction to Life's phenomena. The poet moulds that which appears
evanescent and ephemeral in image and in mood into everlasting values.
In this act of creation he serves eternity.

Poetry, in especial lyrical poetry, must be acknowledged the supreme
art, culminating as it does in a union of the other arts, the musical,
the plastic, and the pictorial.

The most eminent contemporary poets of Europe have, each in accordance
with his individual temperament, reflected in their work the spiritual
essence of our age, its fears and failures, its hopes and high
achievements: Maeterlinck, with his mood of resignation and his
retirement into a dusky twilight where his shadowy figures move
noiselessly like phantoms in fate-laden dimness; Dehmel, the worshipper
of will, with his passion for materiality and the beauty of all things
physical and tangible; Verhaeren, the visionary of a new vitality, who
sees in the toilers of fields and factories the heroic gesture of our
time and who might have written its great epic of industry but for the
overwhelming lyrical mood of his soul.

Until a few years ago, known only to a relatively small community on the
continent but commanding an ever increasing attention which has borne
his name far beyond the boundary of his country, the personality of
Rainer Maria Rilke stands to-day beside the most illustrious poets of
modern Europe.

                                   

The background against which the figure of Rainer Maria Rilke is
silhouetted is so varied, the influences which have entered into his
life are so manifold, that a study of his work, however slight, must
needs take into consideration the elements through which this poet has
matured into a great master.

Prague, the city in which Rilke was born in 1875, with its sinister
palaces and crumbling towers that rose in the early Middle Ages and have
reached out into our time like the threatening fingers of mighty hands
which have wielded swords for generations and which are stained with the
blood of many wounds of many races; the city where amid grey old ruins
blonde maidens are at play or are lost in reverie in the green cool
parks and shady gardens with which the Bohemian capital abounds, this
Prague of mingled grotesqueness and beauty gave to the young boy his
first impressions.

There is a period in the life of every artist when his whole being seems
lost in a contemplation of the surrounding world, when the application
to work is difficult, like the violent forcing of something that is
awaiting its time. This is the time of his dream, as sacred as the days
of early spring before wind and rain and light have touched the fruits
of the fields, when there is a tense bleak silence over the whole of
nature, in which is wrapped the strength of storms and the glow of the
summer's sun. This is the time of his deepest dream, and upon this dream
and its guarding depends the final realization of his life's work.

The young graduate of the Gymnasium was to enter upon the career of an
army officer in accordance with the traditions of the family, an old
noble house which traces its lineage far back to Carinthian ancestry.
His inclinations, however, pointed so decisively in the direction of the
finer arts of life that he left the Military Academy after a very short
attendance to devote himself to the study of philosophy and the history
of art.

As one turns the pages of Rilke's first small book of poems, published
originally under the title _Larenopfer_, in the year 1895, and which
appeared in more recent editions under the less descriptive name _Erste
Gedichte_, one realizes at once, in spite of a lack of plasticity in the
presentation, that here speaks one who has lingered long and lovingly
over the dream of his boyhood. As the title indicates, these poems are a
tribute, an offering to the Lares, the home spirits of his native town.
Prague and the surrounding country are the ever recurring theme of
almost every one of these poems. The meadows, the maidens, the dark
river in the evening, the spires of the cathedral at night rising like
grey mists are seen with a wonderment, the great well-spring of all
poetic imagination, with a well-nigh religious piety. Through all these
poems there sounds like a subdued accompaniment a note of gratitude for
the ability to thus vision the world, to be sunk in the music of all
things. "Without is everything that I feel within myself, and without
and within myself everything is immeasurable, illimitable."

These pictures of town and landscape are never separated from their
personal relation to the poet. He feels too keenly his dependence upon
them, as a child views flowers and stars as personal possessions. Not
until later was he to reach the height of an impersonal objectivity in
his art. What distinguishes these early poems from similar adolescent
productions is the restraint in the presentation, the economy and
intensity of expression and that quality of listening to the inner voice
of things which renders the poet the seer of mankind.

The second book of poems appeared two years later and like the first
volume _Traumgekront_ is full of the music that is reminiscent of the
mild melancholy of the Bohemian folk-songs, in whose gentle rhythms the
barbaric strength of the race seems to be lulled to rest as the waves of
a far-away tumultuous sea gently lap the shore. The themes of
_Traumgekront_ are extended somewhat beyond the immediate environment
of Prague and some of the most beautiful poems are luminous pictures of
villages hidden in the snowy blossoming of May and June, out of which
rises here and there the solitary soft voice of a boy or girl singing.
In these first two volumes the poet is satisfied with painting in words,
full of sonorous beauty, the surrounding world. From this period dates
the small poem _Evening_, which seems to have been sketched by a
Japanese painter, so clear and colourful is its texture, so precious and
precise are its outlines.

With _Advent_ and _Mir Zur Feier_, both published within the following
three years, a phase of questioning commences, a dim desire begins to
stir to reach out into the larger world "deep into life, out beyond
time." Whereas the early poems were characterized by a tendency to turn
away from the turmoil of life--in fact, the concrete world of reality
does not seem to exist--there is noticeable in these two later volumes
an advance toward life in the sense that the poet is beginning to
approach and to vision some of its greatest symbols.

Throughout the entire work of Rilke, in his poetry as well as in his
interpretations of painting and sculpture, there are two elements that
constitute the cornerstones in the structure of his art. If, as has been
said with a degree of verity, Nietzsche was primarily a musician whose
philosophy had for its basis and took its ultimate aspects from the
musical quality of his artistic endowment, it may be maintained with an
equal amount of truth that Rilke is primarily a painter and sculptor
whose poetry rests upon the fundaments of the pictorial and plastic
arts.

Up to the time of the publication of these volumes, Rilke's poems
possessed a quietude, a stillness suggested in the straight unbroken yet
delicate lines of the picture which he portrays and in the soft, almost
unpulsating rhythm of his words. The approach of evening or nightfall,
the coming of dawn, the change of the seasons, the slow changes of light
into darkness and of darkness into light, in short, the most silent yet
greatest metamorphoses in the external aspects of nature form the
contents of many of these first poems. The inanimate object and the
living creature in nature are not seen in the sharp contours of their
isolation; they are viewed and interpreted in the atmosphere that
surrounds them, in which they are enwrapped and so densely veiled that
the outlines are only dimly visible, be that atmosphere the mystic grey
of northern twilight or the dark velvety blue of southern summer nights.
In _Advent_, the experience of the atmosphere becomes an experience in
his innermost soul and, therefore, all things become of value to him
only in so far as they partake of the atmosphere, as they are seen in a
peculiar air and distance. This first phase in Rilke's work may be
defined as the phase of reposeful nature.

To this sphere of relaxation and restfulness in which the objects are
static and are changed only as the surrounding atmosphere affects them,
the second phase in the poet's development adds another element, which
later was to grow into dimensions so powerful, so violently breaking
beyond the limitations of simple expression in words that it could only
find its satisfaction in a dithyrambic hymn to the work of the great
plastic artist of our time, to the creations of Auguste Rodin. This
second element is that which the French sculptor in a different medium
has carried to perfection. It is the element of gesture, of dramatic
movement.

This might seem the appropriate place in which to speak of Rilke's
monograph on the art of Rodin. To do so would, however, be an undue
anticipation, for it will be necessary to trace Rilke's development
through several transitions before the value of his contact with the
work of Rodin can be fully measured.

The gesture, the movement begins in _Advent_ and _Celebration_ to
disturb the stillness prevailing in the first two volumes of poems. Even
here it is only gentle and shy at first like the stirring of a breath of
wind over a quiet sea; and gentle beings make this first gesture,
children and young women at play, singing, dancing or at prayer.

Particularly in the cycle _Songs of the Maidens_ in the book
_Celebration_, the atmosphere is condensed and becomes the psychic
background of the landscape against which the gesture of longing or
expectation is seen and felt. It is the impatience to burst into
blossoming, the longing for love which pulsates in these _Songs of the
Maidens_ with the tenseness of suspense. _The Prayers of the Maidens to
Mary_ have not the mild melody of maidenly prayer; they vibrate with the
ecstasy of expectant life, and the Madonna is more than the Heavenly
Virgin, their longing transforms her into the symbol of earthly love and
motherhood. This expectation, in spite of its intensity, is subdued and
is only heard like the cadence of a far off dream:

    "How shall I go on tiptoe
     From childhood to Annunciation
     Through the dim twilight
     Into Thy Garden?"

Mention should be made of some prose writings which Rilke published in
the year 1898 and shortly afterward. They are _Two Stories of Prague_,
_The Touch of Life_ and _The Last_; three volumes of short stories; a
two-act drama, _The Daily Life_, points to a strong Maeterlinck
influence, and finally _Stories of God_. With both beauty of detail and
problematic interest, the short stories show an incoherence of treatment
and a lack of dramatic co-ordination easily conceivable in a poet who is
essentially lyrical and who at that time had not mastered the means of
technique to give to his characters the clear chiselling of the epic
form.

                                   

A sojourn in Russia and especially the acquaintance with the novels of
Dostoievsky became potent factors in Rilke's development and served to
deepen creations which without this influence might have terminated in a
grandiose aesthesia.

Broadly speaking, Russian art and literature may be described as
springing from an ethical impulse and as having for their motive power
and _raison d'etre_ the tendency toward socio-political reform, in
contradistinction to the art and literature of Western culture, whose
motives and aims are primarily of an aesthetic nature and seek in art the
reconciliation of the dualism between spirit and matter.

Dostoievsky, whom Merejkovsky describes somewhere as the man with the
never-young face, the face "with its shadows of suffering and its
wrinkles of sunken-in cheeks ... but that which gives to this face its
most tortured expression is its seeming immobility, the suddenly
interrupted impulse, the life hardened into a stone:" this Dostoievsky
and particularly his _Rodion Raskolnikov_ cycle became a profound
artistic experience to Rilke. The poor, the outcasts, the homeless ones
received for him a new significance, the significance of the isolated
figure placed in the mighty everchanging current of a life in which this
figure stands strong and solitary. In the poem entitled _Pont Du
Carrousel_, written in Paris a few years later, Rilke has visioned the
blind beggar aloof amid the fluctuating crowds of the metropolis.

Of Russia and its influence upon him, Rilke writes: "Russia became for
me the reality and the deep daily realization that reality is something
that comes infinitely slowly to those who have patience. Russia is the
country where men are solitary, each one with a world within himself,
each one profound in his humbleness and without fear of humiliating
himself, and because of that truly pious. Here the words of men are only
fragile bridges above their real life."

The great symbols of Solitude and of Death enter into the poet's work.

                                   

In the first decade of the new century Rilke reached the height of his
art and with a few exceptions the poems represented in this volume are
selected from the poems which were published between the years 1900 and
1908. The ascent toward the acme of Rilke's art after the year 1900 is
as rapid as it is precipitous. Only a few years previous we read in
Advent:

    "That is longing: To dwell in the flux of things,
     To have no home in the present.
     And these are wishes: gentle dialogues
     Of the poor hours with eternity."

With _Das Buch der Bilder_ the dream is ended, the veil of mist is
lifted and before us are revealed pictures and images that rise before
our eyes in clear colourful contours. Whether the poet conjures from the
depths of myth _The Kings in Legends_, or whether we read from _The
Chronicle of a Monk_ the awe-inspiring description of _The Last Judgment
Day_, or whether in Paris on a Palm Sunday we see _The Maidens at
Confirmation_, the pictures presented stand out with the clearness and
finality of the typical.

It is a significant fact that Rilke dedicated this book to Gerhart
Hauptmann, "in love and gratitude for his Michael Kramer." Hauptmann,
like Rilke in these poems, has placed before us great epic figures and
his art is so concentrated that often the simple expression of the
thought of one of his characters produces a shudder in the listener or
reader because in this thought there vibrates the suffering of an entire
social class and in it resounds the sorrow of many generations.

                                   

In _The Book of Pictures_, Rilke's art reaches its culmination on what
might be termed its monumental side. The visualization is elevated to
the impersonal objective level which gives to the rhythm of these poems
an imperturbable calm, to the figures presented a monumental erectness.
_The Men of the House of Colonna_, _The Czars_, _Charles XII Riding
Through the Ukraine_ are portrayed each with his individual historical
gesture, with a luminosity as strong as the colour and movement which
they gave to their time. In the mythical poem, _Kings in Legends_, this
concrete element in the art of Rilke has found perhaps its supreme
expression:

    "Kings in old legends seem
     Like mountains rising in the evening light.
     They blind all with their gleam,
     Their loins encircled are by girdles bright,
     Their robes are edged with bands
     Of precious stones--the rarest earth affords--
     With richly jeweled hands
     They hold their slender, shining, naked swords."

There are in _The Book of Pictures_ poems in which this will to
concentrate a mood into its essence and finality is applied to purely
lyrical poems as in _Initiation_, that stands out in this volume like
"the great dark tree" itself so immeasurable is the straight line of its
aspiration reaching into the far distant silence of the night; or as in
the poem entitled _Autumn_, with its melancholy mood of gentle descent
in all nature.

In _The Book of Hours_, Rilke withdraws from the world not from
weariness but weighed down under the manifold conflicting visions. As
the prophet who would bring to the world a great possession must go
forth into the desert to be alone until the kingdom comes to him from
within, so the poet must leave the world in order to gain the deeper
understanding, to be face to face with God. The mood of _Das
Stunden-Buch_ is this mood of being face to face with God; it elevates
these poems to prayer, profound prayer of doubt and despair, exalted
prayer of reconciliation and triumph.

_The Book of Hours_ contains three parts written at different periods in
the poet's life: _The Book of a Monk's Life_ (1899); _The Book of
Pilgrimage_ (1901), and _The Book of Poverty and Death_ (1903), although
the entire volume was not published until several years later. _The Book
of Hours_ glows with a mystic fervour to know God, to be near him. In
this desire to approach the Nameless One, the young Brother in _The Book
of a Monk's Life_ builds up about God parables, images and legends
reminiscent of those of the 17th century Angelus Silesius, but sustained
by a more pregnant language because exalted by a more ardent visionary
force. The motif of _The Monk's Life_ is expressed in the poem beginning
with the lines:

    "I live my life in circles that grow wide
     And endlessly unroll."

Through the grey cell of the young Monk there flash in luminous
magnificence the colours of the great renaissance masters, for he feels
in Titian, in Michelangelo, in Raphael the same fervour that animates
him; they, too, are worshippers of the same God.

There are poems in _The Book of Pilgrimage_ of the stillness of a
whispered prayer in a great Cathedral and there are others that carry in
their exultation the music of mighty hymns. The visions in this second
book are no less ecstatic though less glowingly colourful; they have
withdrawn inward and have brought a great peace and a great faith as in
the poem of God, whose very manifestation is the quietude and hush of a
silent world:

    "By day Thou art the Legend and the Dream
     That like a whisper floats about all men,
     The deep and brooding stillnesses which seem,
     After the hour has struck, to close again.
     And when the day with drowsy gesture bends
     And sinks to sleep beneath the evening skies,
     As from each roof a tower of smoke ascends
     So does Thy Realm, my God, around me rise."

The last part of _The Book of Hours_, _The Book of Poverty and Death_,
is finally a symphony of variations on the two great symbolic themes in
the work of Rilke. As Christ in the parable of the rich young man
demands the abandonment of all treasures, so in this book the poet sees
the coming of the Kingdom, the fulfilment of all our longings for a
nearness to God when we have become simple again like little children
and poor in possessions like God Himself. In this phase of Rilke's
development, the principle of renunciation constitutes a certain
negative element in his philosophy. The poet later proceeded to a
positive acquiescence toward man's possessions, at least those acquired
or created in the domain of art.

In our approach through the mystic we touch reality most deeply. It is
because of this that all art and all philosophy culminate in their final
forms in a crystallization of those values of life that remain forever
inexplicable to pure reason; they become religious in the simple,
profound sense of that word. Before the eternal facts of Life doubt and
strife are reconciled into faith, will and pride change into humility.
The realization of this truth expressed in the medium of poetry is the
significance of Rilke's _Book of Hours_. A distinguished Scandinavian
writer has pronounced _Das Stunden-Buch_ one of the supreme literary
achievements of our time and its deepest and most beautiful book of
prayer.

In his subsequent poetic work Rilke did not again reach the sustained
high quality of this book, the mood and idea of which he incorporated
into a prose work of exquisite lyrical beauty: _The Sketch of Malte
Laurids Brigge_.

                                   

In _New Poems_ (1907) and _New Poems, Second Part_ (1908) the historical
figure, frequently taken from the Old Testament, has grown beyond the
proportions of life; it is weightier with fate and invariably becomes
the means of expressing symbolically an abstract thought or a great
human destiny. _Abishag_ presents the contrast between the dawning and
the fading life; _David Singing Before Saul_ shows the impatience of
awakening ambition, and _Joshua_ is the man who forces even God to do
his will. The antique Hellenic world rises with shining splendour in the
poems _Eranna to Sappho_, _Lament for Antinous_, _Early Apollo_ and the
_Archaic Torso of Apollo_.

The spirit of the Middle Ages with its religious fervour and
superstitious fanaticism is symbolized in several poems, the most
important among which are _The Cathedral_, _God in the Middle Ages_,
_Saint Sebastian_ personifying martyrdom, and _The Rose Window_, whose
glowing magic is compared to the hypnotic power of the tiger's eye.
Modern Paris is often the background of the _New Poems_, and the crass
play of light and shadow upon the waxen masks of Life's disillusioned in
the Morgue is caught with the same intense realistic vision as the
flamingos and parrots spreading their vari-coloured soft plumage in the
warmth of the sun in the Avenue of the Jardin des Plantes.

Almost all of the poems in these two volumes are short and precise. The
images are portrayed with the sensitive intensity of impressionistic
technique. The majestic quietude of the long lines of _The Book of
Pictures_ is broken, the colours are more vibrant, more scintillating
and the pictures are painted in nervous, darting strokes as though to
convey the manner in which they were perceived: in one single,
all-absorbing glance. For this reason many of these _New Poems_ are not
quite free from a certain element of virtuosity. On the other hand,
Rilke achieves at times a perfect surety of rapid stroke as in the poem
_The Spanish Dancer_, who rises luminously on the horizon of our inner
vision like a circling element of fire, flaming and blinding in the
momentum of her movements. Degas and Zuloaga seem to have combined their
art on one canvas to give to this dancer the abundant elasticity of
grace and the splendid fantasy of colour.

                                   

Many of the themes in the _New Poems_ bear testimony to the fact that
Rilke travelled extensively, prior to the writing of these volumes, in
Italy, Germany, France, and Scandinavia. His book on the five painters
at the artists' colony at Worpswede, where he remained for a time,
entirely given over to the observation of the atmosphere, the movement
of the sky and the play of light upon the far heath of this northern
landscape, is an introduction to every interpretation of the work of
landscape painters and a tender poem to a land whose solitary and
melancholy beauty entered into his own work.

More vital than the influence of the personalities and the art treasures
of the countries which Rilke visited and more potent in its effect upon
his creations, like a great sun over the most fruitful years of his
life, stands the towering personality of Auguste Rodin. The _New Poems_
bear the dedication: "A mon grand ami, Auguste Rodin," indicating the
twofold influence which the French sculptor wielded over the poet, that
of a friend and that of an artist.

One recalls the broad, solidly-built figure of Rodin with his rugged
features and high, finely chiselled forehead, moving slowly among the
white glistening marble busts and statues as a giant in an old legend
moves among the rocks and mountains of his realm, patient, all-enduring,
the man who has mastered life, strong and tempered by the storms of
time. And one thinks of Rainer Maria Rilke, young, blond, with his
slender aristocratic figure, the slightly bent-forward figure of one who
on solitary walks meditates much and intensely, with his sensitive full
mouth and the "firm structure of the eyebrow gladly sunk in the shadow
of contemplation," the face full of dreams and with an expression of
listening to some distant music.

From no other book of his, not excepting _The Book of Hours_, can we
deduce so accurate a conception of Rilke's philosophy of Life and Art as
we can draw from his comparatively short monograph on Auguste Rodin.

Rilke sees in Rodin the dominant personification in our age of the
"power of servitude in all nature." For this reason the book on Rodin is
far more than a purely aesthetic valuation of the sculptor's work; Rilke
traces throughout the book the strongly ethical principle which works
itself out in every creative act in the realm of art. This grasp of the
deeper significance of all art gives to the book on Rodin its well-nigh
religious aspect of thought and its hymnlike rhythm of expression. He
begins: "Rodin was solitary before fame came to him, and afterward he
became perhaps still more solitary. For fame is ultimately but the
summary of all misunderstandings that crystallize about a new name." And
he sums up this one man's greatness: "Sometime it will be realized what
has made this great artist so supreme. He was a worker whose only desire
was to penetrate with all his forces into the humble and the difficult
significance of his tool. Therein lay a certain renunciation of life but
in just this renunciation lay his triumph--for Life entered into his
work."

Rodin became to Rilke the manifestation of the divine principle of the
creative impulse in man. Thus Rilke's monograph on Auguste Rodin will
remain the poet's testament on Life and Art.

                                   

Rilke has lived deeply; he has absorbed into his artistic and spiritual
consciousness many of the supreme values of our time. His art holds the
mystic depth of the Slav, the musical strength of the German, and the
visual clarity of the Latin. As artist, he has felt life to be sacred,
and as a priest, he has brought to its altar many offerings.

H.T.

NEW YORK CITY,
AUTUMN, 1918.




FIRST POEMS



    EVENING


    The bleak fields are asleep,
    My heart alone wakes;
    The evening in the harbour
    Down his red sails takes.

    Night, guardian of dreams,
    Now wanders through the land;
    The moon, a lily white,
    Blossoms within her hand.




    MARY VIRGIN


    How came, how came from out thy night
    Mary, so much light
    And so much gloom:
    Who was thy bridegroom?

    Thou callest, thou callest and thou hast forgot
    That thou the same art not
    Who came to me
    In thy Virginity.

    I am still so blossoming, so young.
    How shall I go on tiptoe
    From childhood to Annunciation
    Through the dim twilight
    Into thy Garden.



THE BOOK OF PICTURES



    PRESAGING


    I am like a flag unfurled in space,
    I scent the oncoming winds and must bend with them,
    While the things beneath are not yet stirring,
    While doors close gently and there is silence in the chimneys
    And the windows do not yet tremble and the dust is still heavy--
    Then I feel the storm and am vibrant like the sea
    And expand and withdraw into myself
    And thrust myself forth and am alone in the great storm.




    AUTUMN


    The leaves fall, fall as from far,
    Like distant gardens withered in the heavens;
    They fall with slow and lingering descent.

    And in the nights the heavy Earth, too, falls
    From out the stars into the Solitude.

    Thus all doth fall. This hand of mine must fall
    And lo! the other one:--it is the law.
    But there is One who holds this falling
    Infinitely softly in His hands.




    SILENT HOUR


    Whoever weeps somewhere out in the world
    Weeps without cause in the world
    Weeps over me.

    Whoever laughs somewhere out in the night
    Laughs without cause in the night
    Laughs at me.

    Whoever wanders somewhere in the world
    Wanders in vain in the world
    Wanders to me.

    Whoever dies somewhere in the world
    Dies without cause in the world
    Looks at me.




    THE ANGELS


    They all have tired mouths
    And luminous, illimitable souls;
    And a longing (as if for sin)
    Trembles at times through their dreams.

    They all resemble one another,
    In God's garden they are silent
    Like many, many intervals
    In His mighty melody.

    But when they spread their wings
    They awaken the winds
    That stir as though God
    With His far-reaching master hands
    Turned the pages of the dark book of Beginning.




    SOLITUDE


    Solitude is like a rain
    That from the sea at dusk begins to rise;
    It floats remote across the far-off plain
    Upward into its dwelling-place, the skies,
    Then o'er the town it slowly sinks again.
    Like rain it softly falls at that dim hour
    When ghostly lanes turn toward the shadowy morn;
    When bodies weighed with satiate passion's power
    Sad, disappointed from each other turn;
    When men with quiet hatred burning deep
    Together in a common bed must sleep--
    Through the gray, phantom shadows of the dawn
    Lo! Solitude floats down the river wan ...




    KINGS IN LEGENDS


    Kings in old legends seem
    Like mountains rising in the evening light.
    They blind all with their gleam,
    Their loins encircled are by girdles bright,
    Their robes are edged with bands
    Of precious stones--the rarest earth affords--
    With richly jeweled hands
    They hold their slender, shining, naked swords.




    THE KNIGHT


    The Knight rides forth in coat of mail
    Into the roar of the world.
    And here is Life: the vines in the vale
    And friend and foe, and the feast in the hall,
    And May and the maid, and the glen and the grail;
    God's flags afloat on every wall
    In a thousand streets unfurled.

    Beneath the armour of the Knight
    Behind the chain's black links
    Death crouches and thinks and thinks:
    "When will the sword's blade sharp and bright
    Forth from the scabbard spring
    And cut the network of the cloak
    Enmeshing me ring on ring--
    When will the foe's delivering stroke
    Set me free
    To dance
    And sing?"




    THE BOY


    I wish I might become like one of these
    Who, in the night on horses wild astride,
    With torches flaming out like loosened hair
    On to the chase through the great swift wind ride.
    I wish to stand as on a boat and dare
    The sweeping storm, mighty, like flag unrolled
    In darkness but with helmet made of gold
    That shimmers restlessly. And in a row,
    Behind me in the dark, ten men that glow
    With helmets that are restless, too, like mine,
    Now old and dull, now clear as glass they shine.
    One stands by me and blows a blast apace
    On his great flashing trumpet and the sound
    Shrieks through the vast black solitude around
    Through which, as through a wild mad dream we race.
    The houses fall behind us on their knees,
    Before us bend the streets and them we gain,
    The great squares yieled to us and them we seize--
    And on our steeds rush like the roar of rain.




    INITIATION


    Whosoever thou art! Out in the evening roam,
    Out from thy room thou know'st in every part,
    And far in the dim distance leave thy home,
    Whosoever thou art.
    Lift thine eyes which lingering see
    The shadows on the foot-worn threshold fall,
    Lift thine eyes slowly to the great dark tree
    That stands against heaven, solitary, tall,
    And thou hast visioned Life, its meanings rise
    Like words that in the silence clearer grow;
    As they unfold before thy will to know
    Gently withdraw thine eyes--




    THE NEIGHBOUR


    Strange violin! Dost thou follow me?
    In many foreign cities, far away,
    Thy lone voice spoke to me like memory.
    Do hundreds play thee, or does but one play?

    Are there in all great cities tempest-tossed
    Men who would seek the rivers but for thee,

    Who, but for thee, would be forever lost?
    Why drifts thy lonely voice always to me?
    Why am I the neighbour always
    Of those who force to sing thy trembling strings?
    Life is more heavy--thy song says--
    Than the vast, heavy burden of all things.




    SONG OF THE STATUE


    Who so loveth me that he
    Will give his precious life for me?
    I shall be set free from the stone
    If some one drowns for me in the sea,
    I shall have life, life of my own,--
    For life I ache.

    I long for the singing blood,
    The stone is so still and cold.
    I dream of life, life is good.
    Will no one love me and be bold
    And me awake?

    -------------------------------

    I weep and weep alone,
    Weep always for my stone.
    What joy is my blood to me
    If it ripens like red wine?
    It cannot call back from the sea
    The life that was given for mine,
    Given for Love's sake.




    MAIDENS. I


    Others must by a long dark way
    Stray to the mystic bards,
    Or ask some one who has heard them sing
    Or touch the magic chords.
    Only the maidens question not
    The bridges that lead to Dream;
    Their luminous smiles are like strands of pearls
    On a silver vase agleam.

    The maidens' doors of Life lead out
    Where the song of the poet soars,
    And out beyond to the great world--
    To the world beyond the doors.




    MAIDENS. II


    Maidens the poets learn from you to tell
    How solitary and remote you are,
    As night is lighted by one high bright star
    They draw light from the distance where you dwell.

    For poet you must always maiden be
    Even though his eyes the woman in you wake
    Wedding brocade your fragile wrists would break,
    Mysterious, elusive, from him flee.

    Within his garden let him wait alone
    Where benches stand expectant in the shade
    Within the chamber where the lyre was played
    Where he received you as the eternal One.

    Go! It grows dark--your voice and form no more
    His senses seek; he now no longer sees
    A white robe fluttering under dark beech trees
    Along the pathway where it gleamed before.

    He loves the long paths where no footfalls ring,
    And he loves much the silent chamber where
    Like a soft whisper through the quiet air
    He hears your voice, far distant, vanishing.

    The softly stealing echo comes again
    From crowds of men whom, wearily, he shuns;
    And many see you there--so his thought runs--
    And tenderest memories are pierced with pain.




    THE BRIDE


    Call me, Beloved! Call aloud to me!
    Thy bride her vigil at the window keeps;
    The evening wanes to dusk, the dimness creeps
    Down empty alleys of the old plane-tree.

    O! Let thy voice enfold me close about,
    Or from this dark house, lonely and remote,
    Through deep blue gardens where gray shadows float
    I will pour forth my soul with hands stretched out ...




    AUTUMNAL DAY


    Lord! It is time. So great was Summer's glow:
    Thy shadows lay upon the dials' faces
    And o'er wide spaces let thy tempests blow.

    Command to ripen the last fruits of thine,
    Give to them two more burning days and press
    The last sweetness into the heavy wine.

    He who has now no house will ne'er build one,
    Who is alone will now remain alone;
    He will awake, will read, will letters write
    Through the long day and in the lonely night;
    And restless, solitary, he will rove
    Where the leaves rustle, wind-blown, in the grove.




    MOONLIGHT NIGHT


    South-German night! the ripe moon hangs above
    Weaving enchantment o'er the shadowy lea.
    From the old tower the hours fall heavily
    Into the dark as though into the sea--
    A rustle, a call of night-watch in the grove,
    Then for a while void silence fills the air;
    And then a violin (from God knows where)
    Awakes and slowly sings: Oh Love ... Oh Love ...




    IN APRIL


    Again the woods are odorous, the lark
    Lifts on upsoaring wings the heaven gray
    That hung above the tree-tops, veiled and dark,
    Where branches bare disclosed the empty day.

    After long rainy afternoons an hour
    Comes with its shafts of golden light and flings
    Them at the windows in a radiant shower,
    And rain drops beat the panes like timorous wings.

    Then all is still. The stones are crooned to sleep
    By the soft sound of rain that slowly dies;
    And cradled in the branches, hidden deep
    In each bright bud, a slumbering silence lies.




    MEMORIES OF A CHILDHOOD


    The darkness hung like richness in the room
    When like a dream the mother entered there
    And then a glass's tinkle stirred the air
    Near where a boy sat in the silent gloom.

    The room betrayed the mother--so she felt--
    She kissed her boy and questioned "Are you here?"
    And with a gesture that he held most dear
    Down for a moment by his side she knelt.

    Toward the piano they both shyly glanced
    For she would sing to him on many a night,
    And the child seated in the fading light
    Would listen strangely as if half entranced,

    His large eyes fastened with a quiet glow
    Upon the hand which by her ring seemed bent
    And slowly wandering o'er the white keys went
    Moving as though against a drift of snow.




   DEATH


   Before us great Death stands
   Our fate held close within his quiet hands.
   When with proud joy we lift Life's red wine
   To drink deep of the mystic shining cup
   And ecstasy through all our being leaps--
   Death bows his head and weeps.




    THE ASHANTEE
                    (Jardin d'Acclimatation, Paris)


    No vision of exotic southern countries,
    No dancing women, supple, brown and tall
    Whirling from out their falling draperies
    To melodies that beat a fierce mad call;

    No sound of songs that from the hot blood rise,
    No langorous, stretching, dusky, velvet maids
    Flashing like gleaming weapon their bright eyes,
    No swift, wild thrill the quickening blood pervades.

    Only mouths widening with a still broad smile
    Of comprehension, a strange knowing leer
    At white men, at their vanity and guile,
    An understanding that fills one with fear.

    The beasts in cages much more loyal are,
    Restlessly pacing, pacing to and fro,
    Dreaming of countries beckoning from afar,
    Lands where they roamed in days of long ago.

    They burn with an unquenched and smothered fire
    Consumed by longings over which they brood,
    Oblivious of time, without desire,
    Alone and lost in their great solitude.




    REMEMBRANCE


    Expectant and waiting you muse
    On the great rare thing which alone
    To enhance your life you would choose:
    The awakening of the stone,
    The deeps where yourself you would lose.

    In the dusk of the shelves, embossed
    Shine the volumes in gold and browns,
    And you think of countries once crossed,
    Of pictures, of shimmering gowns
    Of the women that you have lost.

    And it comes to you then at last--
    And you rise for you are aware
    Of a year in the far off past
    With its wonder and fear and prayer.




    MUSIC


    What play you, O Boy? Through the garden it stole
    Like wandering steps, like a whisper--then mute;
    What play you, O Boy? Lo! your gypsying soul
    Is caught and held fast in the pipes of Pan's flute.

    And what conjure you? Imprisoned is the song,
    It lingers and longs in the reeds where it lies;
    Your young life is strong, but how much more strong
    Is the longing that through your music sighs.

    Let your flute be still and your soul float through
    Waves of sound formless as waves of the sea,
    For here your song lived and it wisely grew
    Before it was forced into melody.

    Its wings beat gently, its note no more calls,
    Its flight has been spent by you, dreaming Boy!
    Now it no longer steals over my walls--
    But in my garden I'd woo it to joy.




    MAIDEN MELANCHOLY


    A young knight comes into my mind
    As from some myth of old.

    He came! You felt yourself entwined
    As a great storm would round you wind.
    He went! A blessing undefined
    Seemed left, as when church-bells declined
    And left you wrapt in prayer.
    You fain would cry aloud--but bind
    Your scarf about you and tear-blind
    Weep softly in its fold.

    A young knight comes into my mind
    Full armored forth to fare.

    His smile was luminously kind
    Like glint of ivory enshrined,
    Like a home longing undivined,
    Like Christmas snows where dark ways wind,
    Like sea-pearls about turquoise twined,
    Like moonlight silver when combined
    With a loved book's rare gold.




    MAIDENS AT CONFIRMATION

                    (Paris in May, 1903)


    The white veiled maids to confirmation go
    Through deep green garden paths they slowly wind;
    Their childhood they are leaving now behind:
    The future will be different, they know.

    Oh! Will it come? They wait--It must come soon!
    The next long hour slowly strikes at last,
    The whole house stirs again, the feast is past,
    And sadly passes by the afternoon ...

    Like resurrection were the garments white
    The wreathed procession walked through trees arched wide
    Into the church, as cool as silk inside,
    With long aisles of tall candles flaming bright:
    The lights all shone like jewels rich and rare
    To solemn eyes that watched them gleam and flare.

    Then through the silence the great song rose high
    Up to the vaulted dome like clouds it soared,
    Then luminously, gently down it poured--
    Over white veils like rain it seemed to die.

    The wind through the white garments softly stirred
    And they grew vari-coloured in each fold
    And each fold hidden blossoms seemed to hold
    And flowers and stars and fluting notes of bird,
    And dim, quaint figures shimmering like gold
    Seemed to come forth from distant myths of old.

    Outside the day was one of green and blue,
    With touches of a luminous glowing red,
    Across the quiet pond the small waves sped.
    Beyond the city, gardens hidden from view
    Sent odors of sweet blossoms on the breeze
    And singing sounded through the far off trees.

    It was as though garlands crowned everything
    And all things were touched softly by the sun;
    And many windows opened one by one
    And the light trembled on them glistening.




    THE WOMAN WHO LOVES


    Ah yes! I long for you. To you I glide
    And lose myself--for to you I belong.
    The hope that hitherto I have denied
    Imperious comes to me as from your side
    Serious, unfaltering and swift and strong.

    Those times: the times when I was quite alone
    By memories wrapt that whispered to me low,
    My silence was the quiet of a stone
    Over which rippling murmuring waters flow.

    But in these weeks of the awakening Spring
    Something within me has been freed--something
    That in the past dark years unconscious lay,
    Which rises now within me and commands
    And gives my poor warm life into your hands
    Who know not what I was that Yesterday.




    PONT DU CARROUSEL


    Upon the bridge the blind man stands alone,
    Gray like a mist veiled monument he towers
    As though of nameless realms the boundary stone
    About which circle distant starry hours.

    He seems the center around which stars glow
    While all earth's ostentations surge below.

    Immovably and silently he stands
    Placed where the confused current ebbs and flows;
    Past fathomless dark depths that he commands
    A shallow generation drifting goes....




    MADNESS


    She thinks: I am--Have you not seen?
    Who are you then, Marie?
    I am a Queen, I am a Queen!
    To your knee, to your knee!

    And then she weeps: I was--a child--
    Who were you then, Marie?
    Know you that I was no man's child,
    Poor and in rags--said she.

    And then a Princess I became
    To whom men bend their knees;
    To princes things are not the same
    As those a beggar sees.

    And those things which have made you great
    Came to you, tell me, when?
    One night, one night, one night quite late,
    Things became different then.

    I walked the lane which presently
    With strung chords seemed to bend;
    Then Marie became Melody
    And danced from end to end.

    The people watched with startled mien
    And passed with frightened glance
    For all know that only a Queen
    May dance in the lanes: dance!...




    LAMENT


    Oh! All things are long passed away and far.
    A light is shining but the distant star
    From which it still comes to me has been dead
    A thousand years ... In the dim phantom boat
    That glided past some ghastly thing was said.
    A clock just struck within some house remote.
    Which house?--I long to still my beating heart.
    Beneath the sky's vast dome I long to pray ...
    Of all the stars there must be far away
    A single star which still exists apart.
    And I believe that I should know the one
    Which has alone endured and which alone
    Like a white City that all space commands
    At the ray's end in the high heaven stands.




     SYMBOLS


     From infinite longings finite deeds rise
     As fountains spring toward far-off glowing skies,
     But rushing swiftly upward weakly bend
     And trembling from their lack of power descend--
     So through the falling torrent of our fears
     Our joyous force leaps like these dancing tears.




NEW POEMS




    EARLY APOLLO


    As when at times there breaks through branches bare
    A morning vibrant with the breath of spring,
    About this poet-head a splendour rare
    Transforms it almost to a mortal thing.

    There is as yet no shadow in his glance,
    Too cool his temples for the laurel's glow;
    But later o'er those marble brows, perchance,
    A rose-garden with bushes tall will grow,

    And single petals one by one will fall
    O'er the still mouth and break its silent thrall,
    --The mouth that trembles with a dawning smile
    As though a song were rising there the while.




    THE TOMB OF A YOUNG GIRL


    We still remember! The same as of yore
    All that has happened once again must be.
    As grows a lemon-tree upon the shore--
    It was like that--your light, small breasts you bore,
    And his blood's current coursed like the wild sea.

    That god--
              who was the wanderer, the slim
    Despoiler of fair women; he--the wise,--
    But sweet and glowing as your thoughts of him
    Who cast a shadow over your young limb
    While bending like your arched brows o'er your eyes.




    THE POET


    You Hour! From me you ever take your flight,
    Your swift wings wound me as they whir along;
    Without you void would be my day and night,
    Without you I'll not capture my great song.

    I have no earthly spot where I can live,
    I have no love, I have no household fane,
    And all the things to which myself I give
    Impoverish me with richness they attain.




    THE PANTHER


    His weary glance, from passing by the bars,
    Has grown into a dazed and vacant stare;
    It seems to him there are a thousand bars
    And out beyond those bars the empty air.

    The pad of his strong feet, that ceaseless sound
    Of supple tread behind the iron bands,
    Is like a dance of strength circling around,
    While in the circle, stunned, a great will stands.

    But there are times the pupils of his eyes
    Dilate, the strong limbs stand alert, apart,
    Tense with the flood of visions that arise
    Only to sink and die within his heart.




    GROWING BLIND


    Among all the others there sat a guest
    Who sipped her tea as if one apart,
    And she held her cup not quite like the rest;
    Once she smiled so it pierced one's heart.

    When the group of people arose at last
    And laughed and talked in a merry tone,
    As lingeringly through the rooms they passed
    I saw that she followed alone.

    Tense and still like one who to sing must rise
    Before a throng on a festal night
    She lifted her head, and her bright glad eyes
    Were like pools which reflected light.

    She followed on slowly after the last
    As though some object must be passed by,
    And yet as if were it once but passed
    She would no longer walk but fly.




    THE SPANISH DANCER


    As a lit match first flickers in the hands
    Before it flames, and darts out from all sides
    Bright, twitching tongues, so, ringed by growing bands
    Of spectators--she, quivering, glowing stands
    Poised tensely for the dance--then forward glides

    And suddenly becomes a flaming torch.
    Her bright hair flames, her burning glances scorch,
    And with a daring art at her command
    Her whole robe blazes like a fire-brand
    From which is stretched each naked arm, awake,
    Gleaming and rattling like a frightened snake.

    And then, as though the fire fainter grows,
    She gathers up the flame--again it glows,
    As with proud gesture and imperious air
    She flings it to the earth; and it lies there
    Furiously flickering and crackling still--
    Then haughtily victorious, but with sweet
    Swift smile of greeting, she puts forth her will
    And stamps the flames out with her small firm feet.




    OFFERING


    My body glows in every vein and blooms
    To fullest flower since I first knew thee,
    My walk unconscious pride and power assumes;
    Who art thou then--thou who awaitest me?

    When from the past I draw myself the while
    I lose old traits as leaves of autumn fall;
    I only know the radiance of thy smile,
    Like the soft gleam of stars, transforming all.

    Through childhood's years I wandered unaware
    Of shimmering visions my thoughts now arrests
    To offer thee, as on an altar fair
    That's lighted by the bright flame of thy hair
    And wreathed by the blossoms of thy breasts.




    LOVE SONG


    When my soul touches yours a great chord sings!
    How shall I tune it then to other things?
    O! That some spot in darkness could be found
    That does not vibrate whene'er your depths sound.
    But everything that touches you and me
    Welds us as played strings sound one melody.
    Where is the instrument whence the sounds flow?
    And whose the master-hand that holds the bow?
    O! Sweet song--




    ARCHAIC TORSO OF APOLLO


    We cannot fathom his mysterious head,
    Through the veiled eyes no flickering ray is sent:
    But from his torso gleaming light is shed
    As from a candelabrum; inward bent
    His glance there glows and lingers. Otherwise
    The round breast would not blind you with its grace,
    Nor could the soft-curved circle of the thighs
    Steal to the arc whence issues a new race.
    Nor could this stark and stunted stone display
    Vibrance beneath the shoulders heavy bar,
    Nor shine like fur upon a beast of prey,
    Nor break forth from its lines like a great star--
    There is no spot that does not bind you fast
    And transport you back, back to a far past.




THE BOOK OF HOURS




_The Book of A Monk's Life_




    I live my life in circles that grow wide
    And endlessly unroll,
    I may not reach the last, but on I glide
    Strong pinioned toward my goal.

    About the old tower, dark against the sky,
    The beat of my wings hums,
    I circle about God, sweep far and high
    On through milleniums.

    Am I a bird that skims the clouds along,
    Or am I a wild storm, or a great song?




    Many have painted her. But there was one
    Who drew his radiant colours from the sun.
    Mysteriously glowing through a background dim
    When he was suffering she came to him,
    And all the heavy pain within his heart
    Rose in his hands and stole into his art.
    His canvas is the beautiful bright veil
    Through which her sorrow shines. There where the
    Texture o'er her sad lips is closely drawn
    A trembling smile softly begins to dawn ...
    Though angels with seven candles light the place
    You cannot read the secret of her face.




    In cassocks clad I have had many brothers
    In southern cloisters where the laurel grows,
    They paint Madonnas like fair human mothers
    And I dream of young Titians and of others
    In which the God with shining radiance glows.

    But though my vigil constantly I keep
    My God is dark--like woven texture flowing,
    A hundred drinking roots, all intertwined;
    I only know that from His warmth I'm growing.
    More I know not: my roots lie hidden deep
    My branches only are swayed by the wind.




    Thou Anxious One! And dost thou then not hear
    Against thee all my surging senses sing?
    About thy face in circles drawing near
    My thought floats like a fluttering white wing.

    Dost thou not see, before thee stands my soul
    In silence wrapt my Springtime's prayer to pray?
    But when thy glance rests on me then my whole
    Being quickens and blooms like trees in May.

    When thou art dreaming then I am thy Dream,
    But when thou art awake I am thy Will
    Potent with splendour, radiant and sublime,
    Expanding like far space star-lit and still
    Into the distant mystic realm of Time.




    I love my life's dark hours
    In which my senses quicken and grow deep,
    While, as from faint incense of faded flowers
    Or letters old, I magically steep
    Myself in days gone by: again I give
    Myself unto the past:--again I live.

    Out of my dark hours wisdom dawns apace,
    Infinite Life unrolls its boundless space ...

    Then I am shaken as a sweeping storm
    Shakes a ripe tree that grows above a grave
    'Round whose cold clay the roots twine fast and warm--
    And Youth's fair visions that glowed bright and brave,
    Dreams that were closely cherished and for long,
    Are lost once more in sadness and in song.




_The Book of Pilgrimage_




    By day Thou are the Legend and the Dream
    That like a whisper floats about all men,
    The deep and brooding stillnesses which seem,
    After the hour has struck, to close again.

    And when the day with drowsy gesture bends
    And sinks to sleep beneath the evening skies,
    As from each roof a tower of smoke ascends--
    So does Thy Realm, my God, around me rise.




    All those who seek Thee tempt Thee,
    And those who find would bind Thee
    To gesture and to form.

    But I would comprehend Thee
    As the wide Earth unfolds Thee.
    Thou growest with my maturity,
    Thou Art in calm and storm.

    I ask of Thee no vanity
    To evidence and prove Thee.
    Thou Wert in eons old.

    Perform no miracles for me,
    But justify Thy laws to me
    Which, as the years pass by me.
    All soundlessly unfold.




    In a house was one who arose from the feast
    And went forth to wander in distant lands,
    Because there was somewhere far off in the East
    A spot which he sought where a great Church stands.
    And ever his children, when breaking their bread,
    Thought of him and rose up and blessed him as dead.

    In another house was the one who had died,
    Who still sat at table and drank from the glass
    And ever within the walls did abide--
    For out of the house he could no more pass.
    And his children set forth to seek for the spot
    Where stands the great Church which he forgot.




    Extinguish my eyes, I still can see you,
    Close my ears, I can hear your footsteps fall,
    And without feet I still can follow you,
    And without voice I still can to you call.
    Break off my arms, and I can embrace you,
    Enfold you with my heart as with a hand.
    Hold my heart, my brain will take fire of you
    As flax ignites from a lit fire-brand--
    And flame will sweep in a swift rushing flood
    Through all the singing currents of my blood.




    In the deep nights I dig for you, O Treasure!
    To seek you over the wide world I roam,
    For all abundance is but meager measure
    Of your bright beauty which is yet to come.

    Over the road to you the leaves are blowing,
    Few follow it, the way is long and steep.
    You dwell in solitude--Oh, does your glowing
    Heart in some far off valley lie asleep?

    My bloody hands, with digging bruised, I've lifted,
    Spread like a tree I stretch them in the air
    To find you before day to night has drifted;
    I reach out into space to seek you there ...

    Then, as though with a swift impatient gesture,
    Flashing from distant stars on sweeping wing,
    You come, and over earth a magic vesture
    Steals gently as the rain falls in the spring.




_The Book of Poverty and Death_




    Her mouth is like the mouth of a fine bust
    That cannot utter sound, nor breathe, nor kiss,
    But that had once from Life received all this
    Which shaped its subtle curves, and ever must
    From fullness of past knowledge dwell alone,
    A thing apart, a parable in stone.




    Alone Thou wanderest through space,
    Profound One with the hidden face;
    Thou art Poverty's great rose,
    The eternal metamorphose
    Of gold into the light of sun.

    Thou art the mystic homeless One;
    Into the world Thou never came,
    Too mighty Thou, too great to name;
    Voice of the storm, Song that the wild wind sings,
    Thou Harp that shatters those who play Thy strings!




    A watcher of Thy spaces make me,
    Make me a listener at Thy stone,
    Give to me vision and then wake me
    Upon Thy oceans all alone.
    Thy rivers' courses let me follow
    Where they leap the crags in their flight
    And where at dusk in caverns hollow
    They croon to music of the night.
    Send me far into Thy barren land
    Where the snow clouds the wild wind drives,
    Where monasteries like gray shrouds stand--
    August symbols of unlived lives.
    There pilgrims climb slowly one by one,
    And behind them a blind man goes:
    With him I will walk till day is done
    Up the pathway that no one knows ...


PART THE FIRST.

     It is an ancient Mariner,
     And he stoppeth one of three.
     "By thy long grey beard and glittering eye,
     Now wherefore stopp'st thou me?

     "The Bridegroom's doors are opened wide,
     And I am next of kin;
     The guests are met, the feast is set:
     May'st hear the merry din."

     He holds him with his skinny hand,
     "There was a ship," quoth he.
     "Hold off! unhand me, grey-beard loon!"
     Eftsoons his hand dropt he.

     He holds him with his glittering eye--
     The Wedding-Guest stood still,
     And listens like a three years child:
     The Mariner hath his will.

     The Wedding-Guest sat on a stone:
     He cannot chuse but hear;
     And thus spake on that ancient man,
     The bright-eyed Mariner.

     The ship was cheered, the harbour cleared,
     Merrily did we drop
     Below the kirk, below the hill,
     Below the light-house top.

     The Sun came up upon the left,
     Out of the sea came he!
     And he shone bright, and on the right
     Went down into the sea.

     Higher and higher every day,
     Till over the mast at noon--
     The Wedding-Guest here beat his breast,
     For he heard the loud bassoon.

     The bride hath paced into the hall,
     Red as a rose is she;
     Nodding their heads before her goes
     The merry minstrelsy.

     The Wedding-Guest he beat his breast,
     Yet he cannot chuse but hear;
     And thus spake on that ancient man,
     The bright-eyed Mariner.

     And now the STORM-BLAST came, and he
     Was tyrannous and strong:
     He struck with his o'ertaking wings,
     And chased south along.

     With sloping masts and dipping prow,
     As who pursued with yell and blow
     Still treads the shadow of his foe
     And forward bends his head,
     The ship drove fast, loud roared the blast,
     And southward aye we fled.

     And now there came both mist and snow,
     And it grew wondrous cold:
     And ice, mast-high, came floating by,
     As green as emerald.

     And through the drifts the snowy clifts
     Did send a dismal sheen:
     Nor shapes of men nor beasts we ken--
     The ice was all between.

     The ice was here, the ice was there,
     The ice was all around:
     It cracked and growled, and roared and howled,
     Like noises in a swound!

     At length did cross an Albatross:
     Thorough the fog it came;
     As if it had been a Christian soul,
     We hailed it in God's name.

     It ate the food it ne'er had eat,
     And round and round it flew.
     The ice did split with a thunder-fit;
     The helmsman steered us through!

     And a good south wind sprung up behind;
     The Albatross did follow,
     And every day, for food or play,
     Came to the mariners' hollo!

     In mist or cloud, on mast or shroud,
     It perched for vespers nine;
     Whiles all the night, through fog-smoke white,
     Glimmered the white Moon-shine.

     "God save thee, ancient Mariner!
     From the fiends, that plague thee thus!--
     Why look'st thou so?"--With my cross-bow
     I shot the ALBATROSS.




PART THE SECOND.

     The Sun now rose upon the right:
     Out of the sea came he,
     Still hid in mist, and on the left
     Went down into the sea.

     And the good south wind still blew behind
     But no sweet bird did follow,
     Nor any day for food or play
     Came to the mariners' hollo!

     And I had done an hellish thing,
     And it would work 'em woe:
     For all averred, I had killed the bird
     That made the breeze to blow.
     Ah wretch! said they, the bird to slay
     That made the breeze to blow!

     Nor dim nor red, like God's own head,
     The glorious Sun uprist:
     Then all averred, I had killed the bird
     That brought the fog and mist.
     'Twas right, said they, such birds to slay,
     That bring the fog and mist.

     The fair breeze blew, the white foam flew,
     The furrow followed free:
     We were the first that ever burst
     Into that silent sea.

     Down dropt the breeze, the sails dropt down,
     'Twas sad as sad could be;
     And we did speak only to break
     The silence of the sea!

     All in a hot and copper sky,
     The bloody Sun, at noon,
     Right up above the mast did stand,
     No bigger than the Moon.

     Day after day, day after day,
     We stuck, nor breath nor motion;
     As idle as a painted ship
     Upon a painted ocean.

     Water, water, every where,
     And all the boards did shrink;
     Water, water, every where,
     Nor any drop to drink.

     The very deep did rot: O Christ!
     That ever this should be!
     Yea, slimy things did crawl with legs
     Upon the slimy sea.

     About, about, in reel and rout
     The death-fires danced at night;
     The water, like a witch's oils,
     Burnt green, and blue and white.

     And some in dreams assured were
     Of the spirit that plagued us so:
     Nine fathom deep he had followed us
     From the land of mist and snow.

     And every tongue, through utter drought,
     Was withered at the root;
     We could not speak, no more than if
     We had been choked with soot.

     Ah! well a-day! what evil looks
     Had I from old and young!
     Instead of the cross, the Albatross
     About my neck was hung.




PART THE THIRD.

     There passed a weary time.  Each throat
     Was parched, and glazed each eye.
     A weary time! a weary time!
     How glazed each weary eye,
     When looking westward, I beheld
     A something in the sky.

     At first it seemed a little speck,
     And then it seemed a mist:
     It moved and moved, and took at last
     A certain shape, I wist.

     A speck, a mist, a shape, I wist!
     And still it neared and neared:
     As if it dodged a water-sprite,
     It plunged and tacked and veered.

     With throats unslaked, with black lips baked,
     We could not laugh nor wail;
     Through utter drought all dumb we stood!
     I bit my arm, I sucked the blood,
     And cried, A sail! a sail!

     With throats unslaked, with black lips baked,
     Agape they heard me call:
     Gramercy! they for joy did grin,
     And all at once their breath drew in,
     As they were drinking all.

     See! see! (I cried) she tacks no more!
     Hither to work us weal;
     Without a breeze, without a tide,
     She steadies with upright keel!

     The western wave was all a-flame
     The day was well nigh done!
     Almost upon the western wave
     Rested the broad bright Sun;
     When that strange shape drove suddenly
     Betwixt us and the Sun.

     And straight the Sun was flecked with bars,
     (Heaven's Mother send us grace!)
     As if through a dungeon-grate he peered,
     With broad and burning face.

     Alas! (thought I, and my heart beat loud)
     How fast she nears and nears!
     Are those her sails that glance in the Sun,
     Like restless gossameres!

     Are those her ribs through which the Sun
     Did peer, as through a grate?
     And is that Woman all her crew?
     Is that a DEATH? and are there two?
     Is DEATH that woman's mate?

     Her lips were red, her looks were free,
     Her locks were yellow as gold:
     Her skin was as white as leprosy,
     The Night-Mare LIFE-IN-DEATH was she,
     Who thicks man's blood with cold.

     The naked hulk alongside came,
     And the twain were casting dice;
     "The game is done!  I've won!  I've won!"
     Quoth she, and whistles thrice.

     The Sun's rim dips; the stars rush out:
     At one stride comes the dark;
     With far-heard whisper, o'er the sea.
     Off shot the spectre-bark.

     We listened and looked sideways up!
     Fear at my heart, as at a cup,
     My life-blood seemed to sip!

     The stars were dim, and thick the night,
     The steersman's face by his lamp gleamed white;
     From the sails the dew did drip--
     Till clombe above the eastern bar
     The horned Moon, with one bright star
     Within the nether tip.

     One after one, by the star-dogged Moon
     Too quick for groan or sigh,
     Each turned his face with a ghastly pang,
     And cursed me with his eye.

     Four times fifty living men,
     (And I heard nor sigh nor groan)
     With heavy thump, a lifeless lump,
     They dropped down one by one.

     The souls did from their bodies fly,--
     They fled to bliss or woe!
     And every soul, it passed me by,
     Like the whizz of my CROSS-BOW!




PART THE FOURTH.

     "I fear thee, ancient Mariner!
     I fear thy skinny hand!
     And thou art long, and lank, and brown,
     As is the ribbed sea-sand.

     "I fear thee and thy glittering eye,
     And thy skinny hand, so brown."--
     Fear not, fear not, thou Wedding-Guest!
     This body dropt not down.

     Alone, alone, all, all alone,
     Alone on a wide wide sea!
     And never a saint took pity on
     My soul in agony.

     The many men, so beautiful!
     And they all dead did lie:
     And a thousand thousand slimy things
     Lived on; and so did I.

     I looked upon the rotting sea,
     And drew my eyes away;
     I looked upon the rotting deck,
     And there the dead men lay.

     I looked to Heaven, and tried to pray:
     But or ever a prayer had gusht,
     A wicked whisper came, and made
     my heart as dry as dust.

     I closed my lids, and kept them close,
     And the balls like pulses beat;
     For the sky and the sea, and the sea and the sky
     Lay like a load on my weary eye,
     And the dead were at my feet.

     The cold sweat melted from their limbs,
     Nor rot nor reek did they:
     The look with which they looked on me
     Had never passed away.

     An orphan's curse would drag to Hell
     A spirit from on high;
     But oh! more horrible than that
     Is a curse in a dead man's eye!
     Seven days, seven nights, I saw that curse,
     And yet I could not die.

     The moving Moon went up the sky,
     And no where did abide:
     Softly she was going up,
     And a star or two beside.

     Her beams bemocked the sultry main,
     Like April hoar-frost spread;
     But where the ship's huge shadow lay,
     The charmed water burnt alway
     A still and awful red.

     Beyond the shadow of the ship,
     I watched the water-snakes:
     They moved in tracks of shining white,
     And when they reared, the elfish light
     Fell off in hoary flakes.

     Within the shadow of the ship
     I watched their rich attire:
     Blue, glossy green, and velvet black,
     They coiled and swam; and every track
     Was a flash of golden fire.

     O happy living things! no tongue
     Their beauty might declare:
     A spring of love gushed from my heart,
     And I blessed them unaware:
     Sure my kind saint took pity on me,
     And I blessed them unaware.

     The self same moment I could pray;
     And from my neck so free
     The Albatross fell off, and sank
     Like lead into the sea.




PART THE FIFTH.

     Oh sleep! it is a gentle thing,
     Beloved from pole to pole!
     To Mary Queen the praise be given!
     She sent the gentle sleep from Heaven,
     That slid into my soul.

     The silly buckets on the deck,
     That had so long remained,
     I dreamt that they were filled with dew;
     And when I awoke, it rained.

     My lips were wet, my throat was cold,
     My garments all were dank;
     Sure I had drunken in my dreams,
     And still my body drank.

     I moved, and could not feel my limbs:
     I was so light--almost
     I thought that I had died in sleep,
     And was a blessed ghost.

     And soon I heard a roaring wind:
     It did not come anear;
     But with its sound it shook the sails,
     That were so thin and sere.

     The upper air burst into life!
     And a hundred fire-flags sheen,
     To and fro they were hurried about!
     And to and fro, and in and out,
     The wan stars danced between.

     And the coming wind did roar more loud,
     And the sails did sigh like sedge;
     And the rain poured down from one black cloud;
     The Moon was at its edge.

     The thick black cloud was cleft, and still
     The Moon was at its side:
     Like waters shot from some high crag,
     The lightning fell with never a jag,
     A river steep and wide.

     The loud wind never reached the ship,
     Yet now the ship moved on!
     Beneath the lightning and the Moon
     The dead men gave a groan.

     They groaned, they stirred, they all uprose,
     Nor spake, nor moved their eyes;
     It had been strange, even in a dream,
     To have seen those dead men rise.

     The helmsman steered, the ship moved on;
     Yet never a breeze up blew;
     The mariners all 'gan work the ropes,
     Where they were wont to do:
     They raised their limbs like lifeless tools--
     We were a ghastly crew.

     The body of my brother's son,
     Stood by me, knee to knee:
     The body and I pulled at one rope,
     But he said nought to me.

     "I fear thee, ancient Mariner!"
     Be calm, thou Wedding-Guest!
     'Twas not those souls that fled in pain,
     Which to their corses came again,
     But a troop of spirits blest:

     For when it dawned--they dropped their arms,
     And clustered round the mast;
     Sweet sounds rose slowly through their mouths,
     And from their bodies passed.

     Around, around, flew each sweet sound,
     Then darted to the Sun;
     Slowly the sounds came back again,
     Now mixed, now one by one.

     Sometimes a-dropping from the sky
     I heard the sky-lark sing;
     Sometimes all little birds that are,
     How they seemed to fill the sea and air
     With their sweet jargoning!

     And now 'twas like all instruments,
     Now like a lonely flute;
     And now it is an angel's song,
     That makes the Heavens be mute.

     It ceased; yet still the sails made on
     A pleasant noise till noon,
     A noise like of a hidden brook
     In the leafy month of June,
     That to the sleeping woods all night
     Singeth a quiet tune.

     Till noon we quietly sailed on,
     Yet never a breeze did breathe:
     Slowly and smoothly went the ship,
     Moved onward from beneath.

     Under the keel nine fathom deep,
     From the land of mist and snow,
     The spirit slid: and it was he
     That made the ship to go.
     The sails at noon left off their tune,
     And the ship stood still also.

     The Sun, right up above the mast,
     Had fixed her to the ocean:
     But in a minute she 'gan stir,
     With a short uneasy motion--
     Backwards and forwards half her length
     With a short uneasy motion.

     Then like a pawing horse let go,
     She made a sudden bound:
     It flung the blood into my head,
     And I fell down in a swound.

     How long in that same fit I lay,
     I have not to declare;
     But ere my living life returned,
     I heard and in my soul discerned
     Two VOICES in the air.

     "Is it he?" quoth one, "Is this the man?
     By him who died on cross,
     With his cruel bow he laid full low,
     The harmless Albatross.

     "The spirit who bideth by himself
     In the land of mist and snow,
     He loved the bird that loved the man
     Who shot him with his bow."

     The other was a softer voice,
     As soft as honey-dew:
     Quoth he, "The man hath penance done,
     And penance more will do."




PART THE SIXTH.


     FIRST VOICE.

     But tell me, tell me! speak again,
     Thy soft response renewing--
     What makes that ship drive on so fast?
     What is the OCEAN doing?


     SECOND VOICE.

     Still as a slave before his lord,
     The OCEAN hath no blast;
     His great bright eye most silently
     Up to the Moon is cast--

     If he may know which way to go;
     For she guides him smooth or grim
     See, brother, see! how graciously
     She looketh down on him.


     FIRST VOICE.

     But why drives on that ship so fast,
     Without or wave or wind?


     SECOND VOICE.

     The air is cut away before,
     And closes from behind.

     Fly, brother, fly! more high, more high
     Or we shall be belated:
     For slow and slow that ship will go,
     When the Mariner's trance is abated.

     I woke, and we were sailing on
     As in a gentle weather:
     'Twas night, calm night, the Moon was high;
     The dead men stood together.

     All stood together on the deck,
     For a charnel-dungeon fitter:
     All fixed on me their stony eyes,
     That in the Moon did glitter.

     The pang, the curse, with which they died,
     Had never passed away:
     I could not draw my eyes from theirs,
     Nor turn them up to pray.

     And now this spell was snapt: once more
     I viewed the ocean green.
     And looked far forth, yet little saw
     Of what had else been seen--

     Like one that on a lonesome road
     Doth walk in fear and dread,
     And having once turned round walks on,
     And turns no more his head;
     Because he knows, a frightful fiend
     Doth close behind him tread.

     But soon there breathed a wind on me,
     Nor sound nor motion made:
     Its path was not upon the sea,
     In ripple or in shade.

     It raised my hair, it fanned my cheek
     Like a meadow-gale of spring--
     It mingled strangely with my fears,
     Yet it felt like a welcoming.

     Swiftly, swiftly flew the ship,
     Yet she sailed softly too:
     Sweetly, sweetly blew the breeze--
     On me alone it blew.

     Oh! dream of joy! is this indeed
     The light-house top I see?
     Is this the hill? is this the kirk?
     Is this mine own countree!

     We drifted o'er the harbour-bar,
     And I with sobs did pray--
     O let me be awake, my God!
     Or let me sleep alway.

     The harbour-bay was clear as glass,
     So smoothly it was strewn!
     And on the bay the moonlight lay,
     And the shadow of the moon.

     The rock shone bright, the kirk no less,
     That stands above the rock:
     The moonlight steeped in silentness
     The steady weathercock.

     And the bay was white with silent light,
     Till rising from the same,
     Full many shapes, that shadows were,
     In crimson colours came.

     A little distance from the prow
     Those crimson shadows were:
     I turned my eyes upon the deck--
     Oh, Christ! what saw I there!

     Each corse lay flat, lifeless and flat,
     And, by the holy rood!
     A man all light, a seraph-man,
     On every corse there stood.

     This seraph band, each waved his hand:
     It was a heavenly sight!
     They stood as signals to the land,
     Each one a lovely light:

     This seraph-band, each waved his hand,
     No voice did they impart--
     No voice; but oh! the silence sank
     Like music on my heart.

     But soon I heard the dash of oars;
     I heard the Pilot's cheer;
     My head was turned perforce away,
     And I saw a boat appear.

     The Pilot, and the Pilot's boy,
     I heard them coming fast:
     Dear Lord in Heaven! it was a joy
     The dead men could not blast.

     I saw a third--I heard his voice:
     It is the Hermit good!
     He singeth loud his godly hymns
     That he makes in the wood.
     He'll shrieve my soul, he'll wash away
     The Albatross's blood.




     PART THE SEVENTH.

     This Hermit good lives in that wood
     Which slopes down to the sea.
     How loudly his sweet voice he rears!
     He loves to talk with marineres
     That come from a far countree.

     He kneels at morn and noon and eve--
     He hath a cushion plump:
     It is the moss that wholly hides
     The rotted old oak-stump.

     The skiff-boat neared: I heard them talk,
     "Why this is strange, I trow!
     Where are those lights so many and fair,
     That signal made but now?"

     "Strange, by my faith!" the Hermit said--
     "And they answered not our cheer!
     The planks looked warped! and see those sails,
     How thin they are and sere!
     I never saw aught like to them,
     Unless perchance it were

     "Brown skeletons of leaves that lag
     My forest-brook along;
     When the ivy-tod is heavy with snow,
     And the owlet whoops to the wolf below,
     That eats the she-wolf's young."

     "Dear Lord! it hath a fiendish look--
     (The Pilot made reply)
     I am a-feared"--"Push on, push on!"
     Said the Hermit cheerily.

     The boat came closer to the ship,
     But I nor spake nor stirred;
     The boat came close beneath the ship,
     And straight a sound was heard.

     Under the water it rumbled on,
     Still louder and more dread:
     It reached the ship, it split the bay;
     The ship went down like lead.

     Stunned by that loud and dreadful sound,
     Which sky and ocean smote,
     Like one that hath been seven days drowned
     My body lay afloat;
     But swift as dreams, myself I found
     Within the Pilot's boat.

     Upon the whirl, where sank the ship,
     The boat spun round and round;
     And all was still, save that the hill
     Was telling of the sound.

     I moved my lips--the Pilot shrieked
     And fell down in a fit;
     The holy Hermit raised his eyes,
     And prayed where he did sit.

     I took the oars: the Pilot's boy,
     Who now doth crazy go,
     Laughed loud and long, and all the while
     His eyes went to and fro.
     "Ha! ha!" quoth he, "full plain I see,
     The Devil knows how to row."

     And now, all in my own countree,
     I stood on the firm land!
     The Hermit stepped forth from the boat,
     And scarcely he could stand.

     "O shrieve me, shrieve me, holy man!"
     The Hermit crossed his brow.
     "Say quick," quoth he, "I bid thee say--
     What manner of man art thou?"

     Forthwith this frame of mine was wrenched
     With a woeful agony,
     Which forced me to begin my tale;
     And then it left me free.

     Since then, at an uncertain hour,
     That agony returns;
     And till my ghastly tale is told,
     This heart within me burns.

     I pass, like night, from land to land;
     I have strange power of speech;
     That moment that his face I see,
     I know the man that must hear me:
     To him my tale I teach.

     What loud uproar bursts from that door!
     The wedding-guests are there:
     But in the garden-bower the bride
     And bride-maids singing are:
     And hark the little vesper bell,
     Which biddeth me to prayer!

     O Wedding-Guest! this soul hath been
     Alone on a wide wide sea:
     So lonely 'twas, that God himself
     Scarce seemed there to be.

     O sweeter than the marriage-feast,
     'Tis sweeter far to me,
     To walk together to the kirk
     With a goodly company!--

     To walk together to the kirk,
     And all together pray,
     While each to his great Father bends,
     Old men, and babes, and loving friends,
     And youths and maidens gay!

     Farewell, farewell! but this I tell
     To thee, thou Wedding-Guest!
     He prayeth well, who loveth well
     Both man and bird and beast.

     He prayeth best, who loveth best
     All things both great and small;
     For the dear God who loveth us
     He made and loveth all.

     The Mariner, whose eye is bright,
     Whose beard with age is hoar,
     Is gone: and now the Wedding-Guest
     Turned from the bridegroom's door.

     He went like one that hath been stunned,
     And is of sense forlorn:
     A sadder and a wiser man,
     He rose the morrow morn.





I. THE BURIAL OF THE DEAD

  April is the cruellest month, breeding
  Lilacs out of the dead land, mixing
  Memory and desire, stirring
  Dull roots with spring rain.
  Winter kept us warm, covering
  Earth in forgetful snow, feeding
  A little life with dried tubers.
  Summer surprised us, coming over the Starnbergersee
  With a shower of rain; we stopped in the colonnade,
  And went on in sunlight, into the Hofgarten,                            10
  And drank coffee, and talked for an hour.
  Bin gar keine Russin, stamm' aus Litauen, echt deutsch.
  And when we were children, staying at the archduke's,
  My cousin's, he took me out on a sled,
  And I was frightened. He said, Marie,
  Marie, hold on tight. And down we went.
  In the mountains, there you feel free.
  I read, much of the night, and go south in the winter.

  What are the roots that clutch, what branches grow
  Out of this stony rubbish? Son of man,                                  20
  You cannot say, or guess, for you know only
  A heap of broken images, where the sun beats,
  And the dead tree gives no shelter, the cricket no relief,
  And the dry stone no sound of water. Only
  There is shadow under this red rock,
  (Come in under the shadow of this red rock),
  And I will show you something different from either
  Your shadow at morning striding behind you
  Or your shadow at evening rising to meet you;
  I will show you fear in a handful of dust.                              30
       Frisch weht der Wind
       Der Heimat zu
       Mein Irisch Kind,
       Wo weilest du?
  "You gave me hyacinths first a year ago;
  "They called me the hyacinth girl."
  --Yet when we came back, late, from the Hyacinth garden,
  Your arms full, and your hair wet, I could not
  Speak, and my eyes failed, I was neither
  Living nor dead, and I knew nothing,                                    40
  Looking into the heart of light, the silence.
  Oed' und leer das Meer.

  Madame Sosostris, famous clairvoyante,
  Had a bad cold, nevertheless
  Is known to be the wisest woman in Europe,
  With a wicked pack of cards. Here, said she,
  Is your card, the drowned Phoenician Sailor,
  (Those are pearls that were his eyes. Look!)
  Here is Belladonna, the Lady of the Rocks,
  The lady of situations.                                                 50
  Here is the man with three staves, and here the Wheel,
  And here is the one-eyed merchant, and this card,
  Which is blank, is something he carries on his back,
  Which I am forbidden to see. I do not find
  The Hanged Man. Fear death by water.
  I see crowds of people, walking round in a ring.
  Thank you. If you see dear Mrs. Equitone,
  Tell her I bring the horoscope myself:
  One must be so careful these days.

  Unreal City,                                                            60
  Under the brown fog of a winter dawn,
  A crowd flowed over London Bridge, so many,
  I had not thought death had undone so many.
  Sighs, short and infrequent, were exhaled,
  And each man fixed his eyes before his feet.
  Flowed up the hill and down King William Street,
  To where Saint Mary Woolnoth kept the hours
  With a dead sound on the final stroke of nine.
  There I saw one I knew, and stopped him, crying "Stetson!
  "You who were with me in the ships at Mylae!                            70
  "That corpse you planted last year in your garden,
  "Has it begun to sprout? Will it bloom this year?
  "Or has the sudden frost disturbed its bed?
  "Oh keep the Dog far hence, that's friend to men,
  "Or with his nails he'll dig it up again!
  "You! hypocrite lecteur!--mon semblable,--mon frere!"







II. A GAME OF CHESS

  The Chair she sat in, like a burnished throne,
  Glowed on the marble, where the glass
  Held up by standards wrought with fruited vines
  From which a golden Cupidon peeped out                                  80
  (Another hid his eyes behind his wing)
  Doubled the flames of sevenbranched candelabra
  Reflecting light upon the table as
  The glitter of her jewels rose to meet it,
  From satin cases poured in rich profusion.
  In vials of ivory and coloured glass
  Unstoppered, lurked her strange synthetic perfumes,
  Unguent, powdered, or liquid--troubled, confused
  And drowned the sense in odours; stirred by the air
  That freshened from the window, these ascended                          90
  In fattening the prolonged candle-flames,
  Flung their smoke into the laquearia,
  Stirring the pattern on the coffered ceiling.
  Huge sea-wood fed with copper
  Burned green and orange, framed by the coloured stone,
  In which sad light a carved dolphin swam.
  Above the antique mantel was displayed
  As though a window gave upon the sylvan scene
  The change of Philomel, by the barbarous king
  So rudely forced; yet there the nightingale                             100
  Filled all the desert with inviolable voice
  And still she cried, and still the world pursues,
  "Jug Jug" to dirty ears.
  And other withered stumps of time
  Were told upon the walls; staring forms
  Leaned out, leaning, hushing the room enclosed.
  Footsteps shuffled on the stair.
  Under the firelight, under the brush, her hair
  Spread out in fiery points
  Glowed into words, then would be savagely still.                        110

  "My nerves are bad to-night. Yes, bad. Stay with me.
  "Speak to me. Why do you never speak. Speak.
  "What are you thinking of? What thinking? What?
  "I never know what you are thinking. Think."

  I think we are in rats' alley
  Where the dead men lost their bones.

  "What is that noise?"
                               The wind under the door.
  "What is that noise now? What is the wind doing?"
                               Nothing again nothing.                     120
  "Do
  "You know nothing? Do you see nothing? Do you remember
  "Nothing?"

     I remember
  Those are pearls that were his eyes.
  "Are you alive, or not? Is there nothing in your head?"
  But
  O O O O that Shakespeherian Rag--
  It's so elegant
  So intelligent                                                          130
  "What shall I do now? What shall I do?"
  I shall rush out as I am, and walk the street
  "With my hair down, so. What shall we do tomorrow?
  "What shall we ever do?"
                                       The hot water at ten.
  And if it rains, a closed car at four.
  And we shall play a game of chess,
  Pressing lidless eyes and waiting for a knock upon the door.

  When Lil's husband got demobbed, I said--
  I didn't mince my words, I said to her myself,                          140
  HURRY UP PLEASE IT'S TIME
  Now Albert's coming back, make yourself a bit smart.
  He'll want to know what you done with that money he gave you
  To get yourself some teeth. He did, I was there.
  You have them all out, Lil, and get a nice set,
  He said, I swear, I can't bear to look at you.
  And no more can't I, I said, and think of poor Albert,
  He's been in the army four years, he wants a good time,
  And if you don't give it him, there's others will, I said.
  Oh is there, she said. Something o' that, I said.                       150
  Then I'll know who to thank, she said, and give me a straight look.
  HURRY UP PLEASE IT'S TIME
  If you don't like it you can get on with it, I said.
  Others can pick and choose if you can't.
  But if Albert makes off, it won't be for lack of telling.
  You ought to be ashamed, I said, to look so antique.
  (And her only thirty-one.)
  I can't help it, she said, pulling a long face,
  It's them pills I took, to bring it off, she said.
  (She's had five already, and nearly died of young George.)              160
  The chemist said it would be all right, but I've never been the same.
  You are a proper fool, I said.
  Well, if Albert won't leave you alone, there it is, I said,
  What you get married for if you don't want children?
  HURRY UP PLEASE IT'S TIME
  Well, that Sunday Albert was home, they had a hot gammon,
  And they asked me in to dinner, to get the beauty of it hot--
  HURRY UP PLEASE IT'S TIME
  HURRY UP PLEASE IT'S TIME
  Goonight Bill. Goonight Lou. Goonight May. Goonight.                    170
  Ta ta. Goonight. Goonight.
  Good night, ladies, good night, sweet ladies, good night, good night.







III. THE FIRE SERMON

  The river's tent is broken: the last fingers of leaf
  Clutch and sink into the wet bank. The wind
  Crosses the brown land, unheard. The nymphs are departed.
  Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song.
  The river bears no empty bottles, sandwich papers,
  Silk handkerchiefs, cardboard boxes, cigarette ends
  Or other testimony of summer nights. The nymphs are departed.
  And their friends, the loitering heirs of city directors;               180
  Departed, have left no addresses.
  By the waters of Leman I sat down and wept . . .
  Sweet Thames, run softly till I end my song,
  Sweet Thames, run softly, for I speak not loud or long.
  But at my back in a cold blast I hear
  The rattle of the bones, and chuckle spread from ear to ear.
  A rat crept softly through the vegetation
  Dragging its slimy belly on the bank
  While I was fishing in the dull canal
  On a winter evening round behind the gashouse                           190
  Musing upon the king my brother's wreck
  And on the king my father's death before him.
  White bodies naked on the low damp ground
  And bones cast in a little low dry garret,
  Rattled by the rat's foot only, year to year.
  But at my back from time to time I hear
  The sound of horns and motors, which shall bring
  Sweeney to Mrs. Porter in the spring.
  O the moon shone bright on Mrs. Porter
  And on her daughter                                                     200
  They wash their feet in soda water
  Et O ces voix d'enfants, chantant dans la coupole!

  Twit twit twit
  Jug jug jug jug jug jug
  So rudely forc'd.
  Tereu

  Unreal City
  Under the brown fog of a winter noon
  Mr. Eugenides, the Smyrna merchant
  Unshaven, with a pocket full of currants                                210
  C.i.f. London: documents at sight,
  Asked me in demotic French
  To luncheon at the Cannon Street Hotel
  Followed by a weekend at the Metropole.

  At the violet hour, when the eyes and back
  Turn upward from the desk, when the human engine waits
  Like a taxi throbbing waiting,
  I Tiresias, though blind, throbbing between two lives,
  Old man with wrinkled female breasts, can see
  At the violet hour, the evening hour that strives                       220
  Homeward, and brings the sailor home from sea,
  The typist home at teatime, clears her breakfast, lights
  Her stove, and lays out food in tins.
  Out of the window perilously spread
  Her drying combinations touched by the sun's last rays,
  On the divan are piled (at night her bed)
  Stockings, slippers, camisoles, and stays.
  I Tiresias, old man with wrinkled dugs
  Perceived the scene, and foretold the rest--
  I too awaited the expected guest.                                       230
  He, the young man carbuncular, arrives,
  A small house agent's clerk, with one bold stare,
  One of the low on whom assurance sits
  As a silk hat on a Bradford millionaire.
  The time is now propitious, as he guesses,
  The meal is ended, she is bored and tired,
  Endeavours to engage her in caresses
  Which still are unreproved, if undesired.
  Flushed and decided, he assaults at once;
  Exploring hands encounter no defence;                                   240
  His vanity requires no response,
  And makes a welcome of indifference.
  (And I Tiresias have foresuffered all
  Enacted on this same divan or bed;
  I who have sat by Thebes below the wall
  And walked among the lowest of the dead.)
  Bestows one final patronising kiss,
  And gropes his way, finding the stairs unlit . . .

  She turns and looks a moment in the glass,
  Hardly aware of her departed lover;                                     250
  Her brain allows one half-formed thought to pass:
  "Well now that's done: and I'm glad it's over."
  When lovely woman stoops to folly and
  Paces about her room again, alone,
  She smooths her hair with automatic hand,
  And puts a record on the gramophone.

  "This music crept by me upon the waters"
  And along the Strand, up Queen Victoria Street.
  O City city, I can sometimes hear
  Beside a public bar in Lower Thames Street,                             260
  The pleasant whining of a mandoline
  And a clatter and a chatter from within
  Where fishmen lounge at noon: where the walls
  Of Magnus Martyr hold
  Inexplicable splendour of Ionian white and gold.

       The river sweats
       Oil and tar
       The barges drift
       With the turning tide
       Red sails                                                          270
       Wide
       To leeward, swing on the heavy spar.
       The barges wash
       Drifting logs
       Down Greenwich reach
       Past the Isle of Dogs.
            Weialala leia
            Wallala leialala
       Elizabeth and Leicester
       Beating oars                                                       280
       The stern was formed
       A gilded shell
       Red and gold
       The brisk swell
       Rippled both shores
       Southwest wind
       Carried down stream
       The peal of bells
       White towers
            Weialala leia                                                 290
            Wallala leialala

  "Trams and dusty trees.
  Highbury bore me. Richmond and Kew
  Undid me. By Richmond I raised my knees
  Supine on the floor of a narrow canoe."

  "My feet are at Moorgate, and my heart
  Under my feet. After the event
  He wept. He promised 'a new start'.
  I made no comment. What should I resent?"
  "On Margate Sands.                                                      300
  I can connect
  Nothing with nothing.
  The broken fingernails of dirty hands.
  My people humble people who expect
  Nothing."
       la la

  To Carthage then I came

  Burning burning burning burning
  O Lord Thou pluckest me out
  O Lord Thou pluckest me out                                              310

  







IV. DEATH BY WATER

  Phlebas the Phoenician, a fortnight dead,
  Forgot the cry of gulls, and the deep sea swell
  And the profit and loss.
                                           A current under sea
  Picked his bones in whispers. As he rose and fell
  He passed the stages of his age and youth
  Entering the whirlpool.
                                         Gentile or Jew
  O you who turn the wheel and look to windward,                          320
  Consider Phlebas, who was once handsome and tall as you.







V. WHAT THE THUNDER SAID

  After the torchlight red on sweaty faces
  After the frosty silence in the gardens
  After the agony in stony places
  The shouting and the crying
  Prison and palace and reverberation
  Of thunder of spring over distant mountains
  He who was living is now dead
  We who were living are now dying
  With a little patience                                                  330

  Here is no water but only rock
  Rock and no water and the sandy road
  The road winding above among the mountains
  Which are mountains of rock without water
  If there were water we should stop and drink
  Amongst the rock one cannot stop or think
  Sweat is dry and feet are in the sand
  If there were only water amongst the rock
  Dead mountain mouth of carious teeth that cannot spit
  Here one can neither stand nor lie nor sit                              340
  There is not even silence in the mountains
  But dry sterile thunder without rain
  There is not even solitude in the mountains
  But red sullen faces sneer and snarl
  From doors of mudcracked houses
  If there were water
  And no rock
  If there were rock
  And also water
  And water                                                               350
  A spring
  A pool among the rock
  If there were the sound of water only
  Not the cicada
  And dry grass singing
  But sound of water over a rock
  Where the hermit-thrush sings in the pine trees
  Drip drop drip drop drop drop drop
  But there is no water

  Who is the third who walks always beside you?                          360
  When I count, there are only you and I together
  But when I look ahead up the white road
  There is always another one walking beside you
  Gliding wrapt in a brown mantle, hooded
  I do not know whether a man or a woman
  --But who is that on the other side of you?

  What is that sound high in the air
  Murmur of maternal lamentation
  Who are those hooded hordes swarming
  Over endless plains, stumbling in cracked earth                         370
  Ringed by the flat horizon only
  What is the city over the mountains
  Cracks and reforms and bursts in the violet air
  Falling towers
  Jerusalem Athens Alexandria
  Vienna London
  Unreal

  A woman drew her long black hair out tight
  And fiddled whisper music on those strings
  And bats with baby faces in the violet light                            380
  Whistled, and beat their wings
  And crawled head downward down a blackened wall
  And upside down in air were towers
  Tolling reminiscent bells, that kept the hours
  And voices singing out of empty cisterns and exhausted wells.

  In this decayed hole among the mountains
  In the faint moonlight, the grass is singing
  Over the tumbled graves, about the chapel
  There is the empty chapel, only the wind's home.
  It has no windows, and the door swings,                                 390
  Dry bones can harm no one.
  Only a cock stood on the rooftree
  Co co rico co co rico
  In a flash of lightning. Then a damp gust
  Bringing rain

  Ganga was sunken, and the limp leaves
  Waited for rain, while the black clouds
  Gathered far distant, over Himavant.
  The jungle crouched, humped in silence.
  Then spoke the thunder                                                  400
  DA
  Datta: what have we given?
  My friend, blood shaking my heart
  The awful daring of a moment's surrender
  Which an age of prudence can never retract
  By this, and this only, we have existed
  Which is not to be found in our obituaries
  Or in memories draped by the beneficent spider
  Or under seals broken by the lean solicitor
  In our empty rooms                                                     410
  DA
  Dayadhvam: I have heard the key
  Turn in the door once and turn once only
  We think of the key, each in his prison
  Thinking of the key, each confirms a prison
  Only at nightfall, aetherial rumours
  Revive for a moment a broken Coriolanus
  DA
  Damyata: The boat responded
  Gaily, to the hand expert with sail and oar                            420
  The sea was calm, your heart would have responded
  Gaily, when invited, beating obedient
  To controlling hands

                                       I sat upon the shore
  Fishing, with the arid plain behind me
  Shall I at least set my lands in order?
  London Bridge is falling down falling down falling down
  Poi s'ascose nel foco che gli affina
  Quando fiam ceu chelidon-- O swallow swallow
  Le Prince d'Aquitaine a la tour abolie                                 430
  These fragments I have shored against my ruins
  Why then Ile fit you. Hieronymo's mad againe.
  Datta. Dayadhvam. Damyata.
                             Shantih    shantih    shantih

  Line 416 aetherial] aethereal
  Line 429 ceu] uti-- Editor






NOTES ON "THE WASTE LAND"

Not only the title, but the plan and a good deal of the incidental
symbolism of the poem were suggested by Miss Jessie L. Weston's book on
the Grail legend: From Ritual to Romance (Macmillan).<1> Indeed, so
deeply am I indebted, Miss Weston's book will elucidate the difficulties
of the poem much better than my notes can do; and I recommend it (apart
from the great interest of the book itself) to any who think such
elucidation of the poem worth the trouble. To another work of
anthropology I am indebted in general, one which has influenced our
generation profoundly; I mean The Golden Bough; I have used especially
the two volumes Adonis, Attis, Osiris. Anyone who is acquainted with
these works will immediately recognise in the poem certain references to
vegetation ceremonies.

  <1> Macmillan] Cambridge.

  I. THE BURIAL OF THE DEAD

  Line 20.  Cf.  Ezekiel 2:1.

  23.  Cf.  Ecclesiastes 12:5.

  31.  V.  Tristan und Isolde, i, verses 5-8.

  42.  Id.  iii, verse 24.

  46.  I am not familiar with the exact constitution of the Tarot pack
  of cards, from which I have obviously departed to suit my own convenience.
  The Hanged Man, a member of the traditional pack, fits my purpose
  in two ways:  because he is associated in my mind with the Hanged God
  of Frazer, and because I associate him with the hooded figure in
  the passage of the disciples to Emmaus in Part V. The Phoenician Sailor
  and the Merchant appear later; also the "crowds of people," and
  Death by Water is executed in Part IV.  The Man with Three Staves
  (an authentic member of the Tarot pack) I associate, quite arbitrarily,
  with the Fisher King himself.

  60.  Cf.  Baudelaire:

       "Fourmillante cite, cite; pleine de reves,
       Ou le spectre en plein jour raccroche le passant."

  63.  Cf.  Inferno, iii.  55-7.

                                     "si lunga tratta
       di gente, ch'io non avrei mai creduto
       che morte tanta n'avesse disfatta."

  64.  Cf.  Inferno, iv.  25-7:

       "Quivi, secondo che per ascoltare,
       "non avea pianto, ma' che di sospiri,
       "che l'aura eterna facevan tremare."

  68.  A phenomenon which I have often noticed.

  74.  Cf.  the Dirge in Webster's White Devil.

  76.  V. Baudelaire, Preface to Fleurs du Mal.

  II.  A GAME OF CHESS

  77.  Cf.  Antony and Cleopatra, II. ii., l. 190.

  92.  Laquearia.  V.  Aeneid, I. 726:

       dependent lychni laquearibus aureis
       incensi, et noctem flammis funalia vincunt.

  98.  Sylvan scene.  V. Milton, Paradise Lost, iv.  140.

  99.  V. Ovid, Metamorphoses, vi, Philomela.

  100.  Cf.  Part III, l. 204.

  115.  Cf.  Part III, l. 195.

  118.  Cf.  Webster:  "Is the wind in that door still?"

  126.  Cf.  Part I, l. 37, 48.

  138.  Cf.  the game of chess in Middleton's Women beware Women.

  III.  THE FIRE SERMON

  176.  V. Spenser, Prothalamion.

  192.  Cf.  The Tempest, I.  ii.

  196.  Cf.  Marvell, To His Coy Mistress.

  197.  Cf.  Day, Parliament of Bees:

       "When of the sudden, listening, you shall hear,
       "A noise of horns and hunting, which shall bring
       "Actaeon to Diana in the spring,
       "Where all shall see her naked skin . . ."

  199.  I do not know the origin of the ballad from which these lines
  are taken:  it was reported to me from Sydney, Australia.

  202.  V. Verlaine, Parsifal.

  210.  The currants were quoted at a price "carriage and insurance
  free to London"; and the Bill of Lading etc. were to be handed
  to the buyer upon payment of the sight draft.

  Notes 196 and 197 were transposed in this and the Hogarth Press edition,
  but have been corrected here.

  210.  "Carriage and insurance free"] "cost, insurance and freight"-Editor.

  218.  Tiresias, although a mere spectator and not indeed a "character,"
  is yet the most important personage in the poem, uniting all the rest.
  Just as the one-eyed merchant, seller of currants, melts into
  the Phoenician Sailor, and the latter is not wholly distinct
  from Ferdinand Prince of Naples, so all the women are one woman,
  and the two sexes meet in Tiresias.  What Tiresias sees, in fact,
  is the substance of the poem.  The whole passage from Ovid is
  of great anthropological interest:

       '. . . Cum Iunone iocos et maior vestra profecto est
       Quam, quae contingit maribus,' dixisse, 'voluptas.'
       Illa negat; placuit quae sit sententia docti
       Quaerere Tiresiae: venus huic erat utraque nota.
       Nam duo magnorum viridi coeuntia silva
       Corpora serpentum baculi violaverat ictu
       Deque viro factus, mirabile, femina septem
       Egerat autumnos; octavo rursus eosdem
       Vidit et 'est vestrae si tanta potentia plagae,'
       Dixit 'ut auctoris sortem in contraria mutet,
       Nunc quoque vos feriam!' percussis anguibus isdem
       Forma prior rediit genetivaque venit imago.
       Arbiter hic igitur sumptus de lite iocosa
       Dicta Iovis firmat; gravius Saturnia iusto
       Nec pro materia fertur doluisse suique
       Iudicis aeterna damnavit lumina nocte,
       At pater omnipotens (neque enim licet inrita cuiquam
       Facta dei fecisse deo) pro lumine adempto
       Scire futura dedit poenamque levavit honore.

  221.  This may not appear as exact as Sappho's lines, but I had in mind
  the "longshore" or "dory" fisherman, who returns at nightfall.

  253.  V. Goldsmith, the song in The Vicar of Wakefield.

  257.  V.  The Tempest, as above.

  264.  The interior of St. Magnus Martyr is to my mind one of
  the finest among Wren's interiors.  See The Proposed Demolition
  of Nineteen City Churches (P. S. King & Son, Ltd.).

  266.  The Song of the (three) Thames-daughters begins here.
  From line 292 to 306 inclusive they speak in turn.
  V.  Gotterdammerung, III.  i:  the Rhine-daughters.

  279.  V. Froude, Elizabeth, Vol.  I, ch.  iv, letter of De Quadra
  to Philip of Spain:

  "In the afternoon we were in a barge, watching the games on the river.
  (The queen) was alone with Lord Robert and myself on the poop,
  when they began to talk nonsense, and went so far that Lord Robert
  at last said, as I was on the spot there was no reason why they
  should not be married if the queen pleased."

  293.  Cf.  Purgatorio, v.  133:

       "Ricorditi di me, che son la Pia;
       Siena mi fe', disfecemi Maremma."

  307.  V. St. Augustine's Confessions:  "to Carthage then I came,
  where a cauldron of unholy loves sang all about mine ears."

  308.  The complete text of the Buddha's Fire Sermon (which corresponds
  in importance to the Sermon on the Mount) from which these words are taken,
  will be found translated in the late Henry Clarke Warren's Buddhism
  in Translation (Harvard Oriental Series). Mr. Warren was one
  of the great pioneers of Buddhist studies in the Occident.

  309.  From St. Augustine's Confessions again.  The collocation
  of these two representatives of eastern and western asceticism,
  as the culmination of this part of the poem, is not an accident.

  V. WHAT THE THUNDER SAID

  In the first part of Part V three themes are employed:
  the journey to Emmaus, the approach to the Chapel Perilous
  (see Miss Weston's book) and the present decay of eastern Europe.

  357.  This is Turdus aonalaschkae pallasii, the hermit-thrush
  which I have heard in Quebec County.  Chapman says (Handbook of
  Birds of Eastern North America) "it is most at home in secluded
  woodland and thickety retreats. . . . Its notes are not remarkable
  for variety or volume, but in purity and sweetness of tone and
  exquisite modulation they are unequalled."  Its "water-dripping song"
  is justly celebrated.

  360.  The following lines were stimulated by the account of one
  of the Antarctic expeditions (I forget which, but I think one
  of Shackleton's): it was related that the party of explorers,
  at the extremity of their strength, had the constant delusion
  that there was one more member than could actually be counted.

  367-77. Cf.  Hermann Hesse, Blick ins Chaos:

  "Schon ist halb Europa, schon ist zumindest der halbe Osten Europas auf dem
  Wege zum Chaos, fahrt betrunken im heiligem Wahn am Abgrund entlang
  und singt dazu, singt betrunken und hymnisch wie Dmitri Karamasoff sang.
  Ueber diese Lieder lacht der Burger beleidigt, der Heilige
  und Seher hort sie mit Tranen."

  402.  "Datta, dayadhvam, damyata" (Give, sympathize,
  control). The fable of the meaning of the Thunder is found
  in the Brihadaranyaka--Upanishad, 5, 1.  A translation is found
  in Deussen's Sechzig Upanishads des Veda, p.  489.

  408.  Cf.  Webster, The White Devil, v.  vi:

                                                      ". . . they'll remarry
     Ere the worm pierce your winding-sheet, ere the spider
     Make a thin curtain for your epitaphs."

  412.  Cf.  Inferno, xxxiii.  46:

            "ed io sentii chiavar l'uscio di sotto
            all'orribile torre."

  Also F. H. Bradley, Appearance and Reality, p.  346:

  "My external sensations are no less private to myself than are my
  thoughts or my feelings.  In either case my experience falls within
  my own circle, a circle closed on the outside; and, with all its
  elements alike, every sphere is opaque to the others which surround
  it. . . . In brief, regarded as an existence which appears in a soul,
  the whole world for each is peculiar and private to that soul."

  425.  V. Weston, From Ritual to Romance; chapter on the Fisher King.

  428.  V.  Purgatorio, xxvi.  148.

            "'Ara vos prec per aquella valor
             'que vos guida al som de l'escalina,
             'sovegna vos a temps de ma dolor.'
              Poi s'ascose nel foco che gli affina."

  429.  V.  Pervigilium Veneris.  Cf.  Philomela in Parts II and III.

  430.  V. Gerard de Nerval, Sonnet El Desdichado.

  432.  V. Kyd's Spanish Tragedy.

  434.  Shantih.  Repeated as here, a formal ending to an Upanishad.
  'The Peace which passeth understanding' is a feeble translation
  of the content of this word.



The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock


  S'io credesse che mia risposta fosse
  A persona che mai tornasse al mondo,
  Questa fiamma staria senza piu scosse.
  Ma perciocche giammai di questo fondo
  Non torno vivo alcun, s'i'odo il vero,
  Senza tema d'infamia ti rispondo.



 Let us go then, you and I,
 When the evening is spread out against the sky
 Like a patient etherized upon a table;
 Let us go, through certain half-deserted streets,
 The muttering retreats
 Of restless nights in one-night cheap hotels
 And sawdust restaurants with oyster-shells:
 Streets that follow like a tedious argument
 Of insidious intent
 To lead you to an overwhelming question ...
 Oh, do not ask, "What is it?"
 Let us go and make our visit.

 In the room the women come and go
 Talking of Michelangelo.

 The yellow fog that rubs its back upon the window-panes,
 The yellow smoke that rubs its muzzle on the window-panes,
 Licked its tongue into the corners of the evening,
 Lingered upon the pools that stand in drains,
 Let fall upon its back the soot that falls from chimneys,
 Slipped by the terrace, made a sudden leap,
 And seeing that it was a soft October night,
 Curled once about the house, and fell asleep.

 And indeed there will be time
 For the yellow smoke that slides along the street,
 Rubbing its back upon the window-panes;
 There will be time, there will be time
 To prepare a face to meet the faces that you meet;
 There will be time to murder and create,
 And time for all the works and days of hands
 That lift and drop a question on your plate;
 Time for you and time for me,
 And time yet for a hundred indecisions,
 And for a hundred visions and revisions,
 Before the taking of a toast and tea.

 In the room the women come and go
 Talking of Michelangelo.

 And indeed there will be time
 To wonder, "Do I dare?" and, "Do I dare?"
 Time to turn back and descend the stair,
 With a bald spot in the middle of my hair--
 (They will say: "How his hair is growing thin!")
 My morning coat, my collar mounting firmly to the chin,
 My necktie rich and modest, but asserted by a simple pin--
 (They will say: "But how his arms and legs are thin!")
 Do I dare
 Disturb the universe?
 In a minute there is time
 For decisions and revisions which a minute will reverse.

 For I have known them all already, known them all:
 Have known the evenings, mornings, afternoons,
 I have measured out my life with coffee spoons;
 I know the voices dying with a dying fall
 Beneath the music from a farther room.
   So how should I presume?
 And I have known the eyes already, known them all--
 The eyes that fix you in a formulated phrase,
 And when I am formulated, sprawling on a pin,
 When I am pinned and wriggling on the wall,
 Then how should I begin
 To spit out all the butt-ends of my days and ways?
   And how should I presume?

 And I have known the arms already, known them all--
 Arms that are braceleted and white and bare
 (But in the lamplight, downed with light brown hair!)
 Is it perfume from a dress
 That makes me so digress?
 Arms that lie along a table, or wrap about a shawl.
   And should I then presume?
   And how should I begin?

                                      

 Shall I say, I have gone at dusk through narrow streets
 And watched the smoke that rises from the pipes
 Of lonely men in shirt-sleeves, leaning out of windows? ...

 I should have been a pair of ragged claws
 Scuttling across the floors of silent seas.

                                      

 And the afternoon, the evening, sleeps so peacefully!
 Smoothed by long fingers,
 Asleep ... tired ... or it malingers,
 Stretched on the floor, here beside you and me.
 Should I, after tea and cakes and ices,
 Have the strength to force the moment to its crisis?
 But though I have wept and fasted, wept and prayed,
 Though I have seen my head (grown slightly bald) brought in upon a platter,
 I am no prophet--and here's no great matter;
 I have seen the moment of my greatness flicker,
 And I have seen the eternal Footman hold my coat, and snicker,
 And in short, I was afraid.

 And would it have been worth it, after all,
 After the cups, the marmalade, the tea,
 Among the porcelain, among some talk of you and me,
 Would it have been worth while,
 To have bitten off the matter with a smile,
 To have squeezed the universe into a ball
 To roll it toward some overwhelming question,
 To say: "I am Lazarus, come from the dead,
 Come back to tell you all, I shall tell you all"--
 If one, settling a pillow by her head,
   Should say: "That is not what I meant at all;
   That is not it, at all."

 And would it have been worth it, after all,
 Would it have been worth while,
 After the sunsets and the dooryards and the sprinkled streets,
 After the novels, after the teacups, after the skirts that trail along the
     floor--
 And this, and so much more?--
 It is impossible to say just what I mean!
 But as if a magic lantern threw the nerves in patterns on a screen:
 Would it have been worth while
 If one, settling a pillow or throwing off a shawl,
 And turning toward the window, should say:
   "That is not it at all,
   That is not what I meant, at all."

                                      

 No! I am not Prince Hamlet, nor was meant to be;
 Am an attendant lord, one that will do
 To swell a progress, start a scene or two,
 Advise the prince; no doubt, an easy tool,
 Deferential, glad to be of use,
 Politic, cautious, and meticulous;
 Full of high sentence, but a bit obtuse;
 At times, indeed, almost ridiculous--
 Almost, at times, the Fool.

 I grow old ... I grow old ...
 I shall wear the bottoms of my trousers rolled.

 Shall I part my hair behind? Do I dare to eat a peach?
 I shall wear white flannel trousers, and walk upon the beach.
 I have heard the mermaids singing, each to each.

 I do not think that they will sing to me.

 I have seen them riding seaward on the waves
 Combing the white hair of the waves blown back
 When the wind blows the water white and black.
 We have lingered in the chambers of the sea
 By sea-girls wreathed with seaweed red and brown
 Till human voices wake us, and we drown.




Portrait of a Lady

           Thou hast committed--
           Fornication: but that was in another country,
           And besides, the wench is dead.
                                 The Jew Of Malta


 I

 Among the smoke and fog of a December afternoon
 You have the scene arrange itself--as it will seem to do--
 With "I have saved this afternoon for you";
 And four wax candles in the darkened room,
 Four rings of light upon the ceiling overhead,
 An atmosphere of Juliet's tomb
 Prepared for all the things to be said, or left unsaid.
 We have been, let us say, to hear the latest Pole
 Transmit the Preludes, through his hair and finger tips.
 "So intimate, this Chopin, that I think his soul
 Should be resurrected only among friends
 Some two or three, who will not touch the bloom
 That is rubbed and questioned in the concert room."
 --And so the conversation slips
 Among velleities and carefully caught regrets
 Through attenuated tones of violins
 Mingled with remote cornets
 And begins.

 "You do not know how much they mean to me, my friends,
 And how, how rare and strange it is, to find
 In a life composed so much, so much of odds and ends,
 (For indeed I do not love it ... you knew? you are not blind!
 How keen you are!)
 To find a friend who has these qualities,
 Who has, and gives
 Those qualities upon which friendship lives.
 How much it means that I say this to you--
 Without these friendships--life, what cauchemar!"
 Among the windings of the violins
 And the ariettes
 Of cracked cornets
 Inside my brain a dull tom-tom begins
 Absurdly hammering a prelude of its own,
 Capricious monotone
 That is at least one definite "false note."
 --Let us take the air, in a tobacco trance,
 Admire the monuments
 Discuss the late events,
 Correct our watches by the public clocks.
 Then sit for half an hour and drink our bocks.


 II

 Now that lilacs are in bloom
 She has a bowl of lilacs in her room
 And twists one in her fingers while she talks.
 "Ah, my friend, you do not know, you do not know
 What life is, you who hold it in your hands";
 (Slowly twisting the lilac stalks)
 "You let it flow from you, you let it flow,
 And youth is cruel, and has no remorse
 And smiles at situations which it cannot see."
 I smile, of course,
 And go on drinking tea.
 "Yet with these April sunsets, that somehow recall
 My buried life, and Paris in the Spring,
 I feel immeasurably at peace, and find the world
 To be wonderful and youthful, after all."

 The voice returns like the insistent out-of-tune
 Of a broken violin on an August afternoon:
 "I am always sure that you understand
 My feelings, always sure that you feel,
 Sure that across the gulf you reach your hand.

 You are invulnerable, you have no Achilles' heel.
 You will go on, and when you have prevailed
 You can say: at this point many a one has failed.

 But what have I, but what have I, my friend,
 To give you, what can you receive from me?
 Only the friendship and the sympathy
 Of one about to reach her journey's end.

 I shall sit here, serving tea to friends...."

 I take my hat: how can I make a cowardly amends
 For what she has said to me?
 You will see me any morning in the park
 Reading the comics and the sporting page.
 Particularly I remark
 An English countess goes upon the stage.
 A Greek was murdered at a Polish dance,
 Another bank defaulter has confessed.
 I keep my countenance,
 I remain self-possessed
 Except when a street piano, mechanical and tired
 Reiterates some worn-out common song
 With the smell of hyacinths across the garden
 Recalling things that other people have desired.
 Are these ideas right or wrong?


 III

 The October night comes down; returning as before
 Except for a slight sensation of being ill at ease
 I mount the stairs and turn the handle of the door
 And feel as if I had mounted on my hands and knees.

 "And so you are going abroad; and when do you return?
 But that's a useless question.
 You hardly know when you are coming back,
 You will find so much to learn."
 My smile falls heavily among the bric-a-brac.

 "Perhaps you can write to me."
 My self-possession flares up for a second;
 This is as I had reckoned.
 "I have been wondering frequently of late
 (But our beginnings never know our ends!)
 Why we have not developed into friends."
 I feel like one who smiles, and turning shall remark
 Suddenly, his expression in a glass.
 My self-possession gutters; we are really in the dark.

 "For everybody said so, all our friends,
 They all were sure our feelings would relate
 So closely! I myself can hardly understand.
 We must leave it now to fate.
 You will write, at any rate.
 Perhaps it is not too late,
 I shall sit here, serving tea to friends."

 And I must borrow every changing
 find expression ... dance, dance
 Like a dancing bear,
 Cry like a parrot, chatter like an ape.
 Let us take the air, in a tobacco trance--

 Well! and what if she should die some afternoon,
 Afternoon grey and smoky, evening yellow and rose;
 Should die and leave me sitting pen in hand
 With the smoke coming down above the housetops;
 Doubtful, for quite a while
 Not knowing what to feel or if I understand
 Or whether wise or foolish, tardy or too soon ...
 Would she not have the advantage, after all?
 This music is successful with a "dying fall"
 Now that we talk of dying--
 And should I have the right to smile?




Preludes

 I

 The winter evening settles down
 With smell of steaks in passageways.
 Six o'clock.
 The burnt-out ends of smoky days.
 And now a gusty shower wraps
 The grimy scraps
 Of withered leaves about your feet
 And newspapers from vacant lots;
 The showers beat
 On broken blinds and chimney-pots,
 And at the corner of the street
 A lonely cab-horse steams and stamps.
 And then the lighting of the lamps.


 II

 The morning comes to consciousness
 Of faint stale smells of beer
 From the sawdust-trampled street
 With all its muddy feet that press
 To early coffee-stands.
 With the other masquerades
 That time resumes,
 One thinks of all the hands
 That are raising dingy shades
 In a thousand furnished rooms.


 III

 You tossed a blanket from the bed,
 You lay upon your back, and waited;
 You dozed, and watched the night revealing
 The thousand sordid images
 Of which your soul was constituted;
 They flickered against the ceiling.
 And when all the world came back
 And the light crept up between the shutters,
 And you heard the sparrows in the gutters,
 You had such a vision of the street
 As the street hardly understands;
 Sitting along the bed's edge, where
 You curled the papers from your hair,
 Or clasped the yellow soles of feet
 In the palms of both soiled hands.


 IV

 His soul stretched tight across the skies
 That fade behind a city block,
 Or trampled by insistent feet
 At four and five and six o'clock
 And short square fingers stuffing pipes,
 And evening newspapers, and eyes
 Assured of certain certainties,
 The conscience of a blackened street
 Impatient to assume the world.
 I am moved by fancies that are curled
 Around these images, and cling:
 The notion of some infinitely gentle
 Infinitely suffering thing.
 Wipe your hand across your mouth, and laugh;
 The worlds revolve like ancient women
 Gathering fuel in vacant lots.




Rhapsody on a Windy Night

 Twelve o'clock.
 Along the reaches of the street
 Held in a lunar synthesis,
 Whispering lunar incantations
 Dissolve the floors of the memory
 And all its clear relations,
 Its divisions and precisions,
 Every street lamp that I pass
 Beats like a fatalistic drum,
 And through the spaces of the dark
 Midnight shakes the memory
 As a madman shakes a dead geranium.

 Half-past one,
 The street lamp sputtered,
 The street lamp muttered,
 The street lamp said,
 "Regard that woman
 Who hesitates toward you in the light of the door
 Which opens on her like a grin.
 You see the border of her dress
 Is torn and stained with sand,
 And you see the corner of her eye
 Twists like a crooked pin."

 The memory throws up high and dry
 A crowd of twisted things;
 A twisted branch upon the beach
 Eaten smooth, and polished
 As if the world gave up
 The secret of its skeleton,
 Stiff and white.
 A broken spring in a factory yard,
 Rust that clings to the form that the strength has left
 Hard and curled and ready to snap.

 Half-past two,
 The street lamp said,
 "Remark the cat which flattens itself in the gutter,
 Slips out its tongue
 And devours a morsel of rancid butter."
 So the hand of a child, automatic
 Slipped out and pocketed a toy that was running along the quay.
 I could see nothing behind that child's eye.
 I have seen eyes in the street
 Trying to peer through lighted shutters,
 And a crab one afternoon in a pool,
 An old crab with barnacles on his back,
 Gripped the end of a stick which I held him.

 Half-past three,
 The lamp sputtered,
 The lamp muttered in the dark.

 The lamp hummed:
 "Regard the moon,
 La lune ne garde aucune rancune,
 She winks a feeble eye,
 She smiles into corners.
 She smoothes the hair of the grass.
 The moon has lost her memory.
 A washed-out smallpox cracks her face,
 Her hand twists a paper rose,
 That smells of dust and old Cologne,
 She is alone
 With all the old nocturnal smells
 That cross and cross across her brain.
 The reminiscence comes
 Of sunless dry geraniums
 And dust in crevices,
 Smells of chestnuts in the streets,
 And female smells in shuttered rooms,
 And cigarettes in corridors
 And cocktail smells in bars."

 The lamp said,
 "Four o'clock,
 Here is the number on the door.
 Memory!
 You have the key,
 The little lamp spreads a ring on the stair,
 Mount.
 The bed is open; the tooth-brush hangs on the wall
 Put your shoes at the door, sleep, prepare for life."

 The last twist of the knife.




Morning at the Window

 They are rattling breakfast plates in basement kitchens,
 And along the trampled edges of the street
 I am aware of the damp souls of housemaids
 Sprouting despondently at area gates.

 The brown waves of fog toss up to me
 Twisted faces from the bottom of the street,
 And tear from a passer-by with muddy skirts
 An aimless smile that hovers in the air
 And vanishes along the level of the roofs.




The Boston Evening Transcript

 The readers of the Boston Evening Transcript
 Sway in the blind like a field of ripe corn.
 When evening quickens faintly in the street,
 Wakening the appetites of life in some
 And to others bringing the Boston Evening Transcript,
 I mount the steps and ring the bell, turning
 Wearily, as one would turn to nod good-bye to Rochefoucauld
 If the street were time and he at the end of the street,
 And I say, "Cousin Harriet, here is the Boston Evening Transcript."




Aunt Helen

 Miss Helen Slingsby was my maiden aunt,
 And lived in a small house near a fashionable square
 Cared for by servants to the number of four.
 Now when she died there was silence in heaven
 And silence at her end of the street.
 The shutters were drawn and the undertaker wiped his feet--
 He was aware that this sort of thing had occurred before.
 The dogs were handsomely provided for,
 But shortly afterwards the parrot died too.
 The Dresden clock continued ticking on the mantelpiece,
 And the footman sat upon the dining-table
 Holding the second housemaid on his knees--
 Who had always been so careful while her mistress lived.




Cousin Nancy

 Miss Nancy Ellicot
 Strode across the hills and broke them
 Rode across the hills and broke them--
 The barren New England hills
 Riding to hounds
 Over the cow-pasture.

 Miss Nancy Ellicott smoked
 And danced all the modern dances;
 And her aunts were not quite sure how they felt about it,
 But they knew that it was modern.

 Upon the glazen shelves kept watch
 Matthew and Waldo, guardians of the faith,
 The army of unalterable law.




Mr. Apollinax

 When Mr. Apollinax visited the United States
 His laughter tinkled among the teacups.
 I thought of Fragilion, that shy figure among the birch-trees,
 And of Priapus in the shrubbery
 Gaping at the lady in the swing.
 In the palace of Mrs. Phlaccus, at Professor Channing-Cheetah's
 He laughed like an irresponsible foetus.
 His laughter was submarine and profound
 Like the old man of the seats
 Hidden under coral islands
 Where worried bodies of drowned men drift down in the green silence,
 Dropping from fingers of surf.
 I looked for the head of Mr. Apollinax rolling under a chair,
 Or grinning over a screen
 With seaweed in its hair.
 I heard the beat of centaurs' hoofs over the hard turf
 As his dry and passionate talk devoured the afternoon.
 "He is a charming man"--"But after all what did he mean?"--
 "He has pointed ears ... he must be unbalanced,"--
 "There was something he said that I might have challenged."
 Of dowager Mrs. Phlaccus, and Professor and Mrs. Cheetah
 I remember a slice of lemon and a bitten macaroon.




Hysteria

 As she laughed I was aware of becoming involved in her laughter and
 being part of it, until her teeth were only accidental stars with a
 talent for squad-drill. I was drawn in by short gasps, inhaled at
 each momentary recovery, lost finally in the dark caverns of her
 throat, bruised by the ripple of unseen muscles. An elderly waiter
 with trembling hands was hurriedly spreading a pink and white checked
 cloth over the rusty green iron table, saying: "If the lady and
 gentleman wish to take their tea in the garden, if the lady and
 gentleman wish to take their tea in the garden ..." I decided that
 if the shaking of her breasts could be stopped, some of the fragments
 of the afternoon might be collected, and I concentrated my attention
 with careful subtlety to this end.




Conversation Galante

 I observe: "Our sentimental friend the moon
 Or possibly (fantastic, I confess)
 It may be Prester John's balloon
 Or an old battered lantern hung aloft
 To light poor travellers to their distress."
   She then: "How you digress!"

 And I then: "Some one frames upon the keys
 That exquisite nocturne, with which we explain
 The night and moonshine; music which we seize
 To body forth our own vacuity."
   She then: "Does this refer to me?"
   "Oh no, it is I who am inane."

 "You, madam, are the eternal humorist
 The eternal enemy of the absolute,
 Giving our vagrant moods the slightest twist
 With your air indifferent and imperious
 At a stroke our mad poetics to confute--"
   And--"Are we then so serious?"




La Figlia Che Piange

 Stand on the highest pavement of the stair--
 Lean on a garden urn--
 Weave, weave the sunlight in your hair--
 Clasp your flowers to you with a pained surprise--
 Fling them to the ground and turn
 With a fugitive resentment in your eyes:
 But weave, weave the sunlight in your hair.

 So I would have had him leave,
 So I would have had her stand and grieve,
 So he would have left
 As the soul leaves the body torn and bruised
 As the mind deserts the body it has used.
 I should find
 Some way incomparably light and deft,
 Some way we both should understand,
 Simple and faithless as a smile and shake of the hand.

 She turned away, but with the autumn weather
 Compelled my imagination many days,
 Many days and many hours:
 Her hair over her arms and her arms full of flowers.
 And I wonder how they should have been together!
 I should have lost a gesture and a pose.
 Sometimes these cogitations still amaze
 The troubled midnight and the noon's repose.

THE KEY NOTE


I dreamed I was dreaming one morn as I lay
  In a garden with flowers teeming.
On an island I lay in a mystical bay,
  In the dream that I dreamed I was dreaming.

The ghost of a scent--had it followed me there
  From the place where I truly was resting?
It filled like an anthem the aisles of the air,
  The presence of roses attesting.

Yet I thought in the dream that I dreamed I dreamed
  That the place was all barren of roses--
That it only seemed; and the place, I deemed,
  Was the Isle of Bewildered Noses.

Full many a seaman had testified
  How all who sailed near were enchanted,
And landed to search (and in searching died)
  For the roses the Sirens had planted.

For the Sirens were dead, and the billows boomed
  In the stead of their singing forever;
But the roses bloomed on the graves of the doomed,
  Though man had discovered them never.

I thought in my dream 'twas an idle tale,
  A delusion that mariners cherished--
That the fragrance loading the conscious gale
  Was the ghost of a rose long perished.

I said, "I will fly from this island of woes."
  And acting on that decision,
By that odor of rose I was led by the nose,
  For 'twas truly, ah! truly, Elysian.

I ran, in my madness, to seek out the source
  Of the redolent river--directed
By some supernatural, sinister force
  To a forest, dark, haunted, infected.

And still as I threaded ('twas all in the dream
  That I dreamed I was dreaming) each turning
There were many a scream and a sudden gleam
  Of eyes all uncannily burning!

The leaves were all wet with a horrible dew
  That mirrored the red moon's crescent,
And all shapes were fringed with a ghostly blue,
  Dim, wavering, phosphorescent.

But the fragrance divine, coming strong and free,
  Led me on, though my blood was clotting,
Till--ah, joy!--I could see, on the limbs of a tree,
  Mine enemies hanging and rotting!




CAIN


Lord, shed thy light upon his desert path,
  And gild his branded brow, that no man spill
  His forfeit life to balk thy holy will
That spares him for the ripening of wrath.

Already, lo! the red sign is descried,
  To trembling jurors visibly revealed:
  The prison doors obediently yield,
The baffled hangman flings the cord aside.

Powell, the brother's blood that marks your trail--
  Hark, how it cries against you from the ground,
  Like the far baying of the tireless hound.
Faith! to your ear it is no nightingale.

What signifies the date upon a stone?
  To-morrow you shall die if not to-day.
  What matter when the Avenger choose to slay
Or soon or late the Devil gets his own.

Thenceforth through all eternity you'll hold
  No one advantage of the later death.
  Though you had granted Ralph another breath
Would _he_ to-day less silent lie and cold?

Earth cares not, curst assassin, when you die;
  You never will be readier than now.
  Wear, in God's name, that mark upon your brow,
And keep the life you purchased with a lie!




AN OBITUARIAN


Death-poet Pickering sat at his desk,
  Wrapped in appropriate gloom;
His posture was pensive and picturesque,
  Like a raven charming a tomb.

Enter a party a-drinking the cup
  Of sorrow--and likewise of woe:
"Some harrowing poetry, Mister, whack up,
  All wrote in the key of O.

"For the angels has called my old woman hence
  From the strife (where she fit mighty free).
It's a nickel a line? Cond--n the expense!
  For wealth is now little to me."

The Bard of Mortality looked him through
  In the piercingest sort of a way:
"It is much to me though it's little to you--
  I've _taken_ a wife to-day."

So he twisted the tail of his mental cow
  And made her give down her flow.
The grief of that bard was long-winded, somehow--
  There was reams and reamses of woe.

The widower man which had buried his wife
  Grew lily-like round each gill,
For she turned in her grave and came back to life--
  Then he cruel ignored the bill!

Then Sorrow she opened her gates a-wide,
  As likewise did also Woe,
And the death-poet's song, as is heard inside,
  Is sang in the key of O.




A COMMUTED SENTENCE


Boruck and Waterman upon their grills
  In Hades lay, with many a sigh and groan,
  Hotly disputing, for each swore his own
Were clearly keener than the other's ills.
  And, truly, each had much to boast of--bone
And sinew, muscle, tallow, nerve and skin,
Blood in the vein and marrow in the shin,
  Teeth, eyes and other organs (for the soul
Has all of these and even a wagging chin)
  Blazing and coruscating like a coal!
For Lower Sacramento, you remember,
Has trying weather, even in mid-December.

Now this occurred in the far future. All
  Mankind had been a million ages dead,
  And each to her reward above had sped,
Each to his punishment below,--I call
  That quite a just arrangement. As I said,
Boruck and Waterman in warmest pain
Crackled and sizzed with all their might and main.
  For, when on earth, they'd freed a scurvy host
Of crooks from the State prison, who again
  Had robbed and ravaged the Pacific Coast
And (such the felon's predatory nature)
Even got themselves into the Legislature.

So Waterman and Boruck lay and roared
  In Hades. It is true all other males
  Felt the like flames and uttered equal wails,
But did not suffer _them_; whereas _they_ bored
  Each one the other. But indeed my tale's
Not getting on at all. They lay and browned
Till Boruck (who long since his teeth had ground
  Away and spoke Gum Arabic and made
Stump speeches even in praying) looked around
  And said to Bob's incinerated shade:
"Your Excellency, this is mighty hard on
The inventors of the unpardonable pardon."

The other soul--his right hand all aflame,
  For 'twas with that he'd chiefly sinned, although
  His tongue, too, like a wick was working woe
To the reserve of tallow in his frame--
  Said, with a sputtering, uncertain flow,
And with a gesture like a shaken torch:
"Yes, but I'm sure we'll not much longer scorch.
  Although this climate is not good for Hope,
Whose joyous wing 'twould singe, I think the porch
  Of Hell we'll quit with a pacific slope.
Last century I signified repentance
And asked for commutation of our sentence."

Even as he spoke, the form of Satan loomed
  In sight, all crimson with reflections's fire,
  Like some tall tower or cathedral spire
Touched by the dawn while all the earth is gloomed
  In mists and shadows of the night time. "Sire,"
Said Waterman, his agitable wick
Still sputtering, "what calls you back so quick?
  It scarcely was a century ago
You left us." "I have come to bring," said Nick,
  "St. Peter's answer (he is never slow
In correspondence) to your application
For pardon--pardon me!--for commutation.

"He says that he's instructed to reply
  (And he has so instructed me) that sin
  Like yours--and this poor gentleman's who's in
For bad advice to you--comes rather high;
  But since, apparently, you both begin
To feel some pious promptings to the right,
And fain would turn your faces to the light,
  Eternity seems all too long a term.
So 'tis commuted to one-half. I'm quite
  Prepared, when that expires, to free the worm
And quench the fire." And, civilly retreating,
He left them holding their protracted meeting.




A LIFTED FINGER

    [The _Chronicle_ did a great public service in whipping
    ---- and his fellow-rascals out of office.--_M.H. de Young's
    Newspaper_.]


What! _you_ whip rascals?--_you_, whose gutter blood
Bears, in its dark, dishonorable flood,
Enough of prison-birds' prolific germs
To serve a whole eternity of terms?
_You_, for whose back the rods and cudgels strove
Ere yet the ax had hewn them from the grove?
_You_, the De Young whose splendor bright and brave
Is phosphorescence from another's grave--
Till now unknown, by any chance or luck,
Even to the hearts at which you, feebly struck?
_You_ whip a rascal out of office?--_you_
Whose leadless weapon once ignobly blew
Its smoke in six directions to assert
Your lack of appetite for others' dirt?

Practice makes perfect: when for fame you thirst,
Then whip a rascal. Whip a cripple first.
Or, if for action you're less free than bold--
Your palms both brimming with dishonest gold--
Entrust the castigation that you've planned,
As once before, to woman's idle hand.
So in your spirit shall two pleasures join
To slake the sacred thirst for blood and coin.
Blood? Souls have blood, even as the body hath,
And, spilled, 'twill fertilize the field of wrath.
Lo! in a purple gorge of yonder hills,
Where o'er a grave a bird its day-song stills,
A woman's blood, through roses ever red,
Mutely appeals for vengeance on your head.
Slandered to death to serve a sordid end,
She called you murderer and called me friend.

Now, mark you, libeler, this course if you
Dare to maintain, or rather to renew;
If one short year's immunity has made
You blink again the perils of your trade--
The ghastly sequence of the maddened "knave,"
The hot encounter and the colder grave;
If the grim, dismal lesson you ignore
While yet the stains are fresh upon your floor,
And calmly march upon the fatal brink
With eyes averted to your trail of ink,
Counting unkind the services of those
Who pull, to hold you back, your stupid nose,
The day for you to die is not so far,
Or, at the least, to live the thing you are!

Pregnant with possibilities of crime,
And full of felons for all coming time,
Your blood's too precious to be lightly spilt
In testimony to a venial guilt.
Live to get whelpage and preserve a name
No praise can sweeten and no lie unshame.
Live to fulfill the vision that I see
Down the dim vistas of the time to be:
A dream of clattering beaks and burning eyes
Of hungry ravens glooming all the skies;
A dream of gleaming teeth and foetid breath
Of jackals wrangling at the feast of death;
A dream of broken necks and swollen tongues--
The whole world's gibbets loaded with De Youngs!

_1881._




TWO STATESMEN


In that fair city by the inland sea,
Where Blaine unhived his Presidential bee,
Frank Pixley's meeting with George Gorham sing,
Celestial muse, and what events did spring
From the encounter of those mighty sons
Of thunder, and of slaughter, and of guns.
Great Gorham first, his yearning tooth to sate
And give him stomach for the day's debate,
Entering a restaurant, with eager mien,
Demands an ounce of bacon and a bean.
The trembling waiter, by the statesman's eye
Smitten with terror, hastens to comply;
Nor chairs nor tables can his speed retard,
For famine's fixed and horrible regard
He takes for menace. As he shaking flew,
Lo! the portentous Pixley heaved in view!
Before him yawned invisible the cell,
Unheard, behind, the warden's footsteps fell.
Thrice in convention rising to his feet,
He thrice had been thrust back into his seat;
Thrice had protested, been reminded thrice
The nation had no need of his advice.
Balked of his will to set the people right,
His soul was gloomy though his hat was white,
So fierce his mien, with provident accord
The waiters swarmed him, thinking him a lord.
He spurned them, roaring grandly to their chief:
"Give me (Fred. Crocker pays) a leg of beef!"
His wandering eye's deluminating flame
Fell upon Gorham and the crisis came!
For Pixley scowled and darkness filled the room
Till Gorham's flashing orbs dispelled the gloom.
The patrons of the place, by fear dismayed,
Sprang to the street and left their scores unpaid.
So, when Jove thunders and his lightnings gleam
To sour the milk and curdle, too, the cream,
And storm-clouds gather on the shadowed hill,
The ass forsakes his hay, the pig his swill.
Hotly the heroes now engaged--their breath
Came short and hard, as in the throes of death.
They clenched their hands, their weapons brandished high,
Cut, stabbed, and hewed, nor uttered any cry,
But gnashed their teeth and struggled on! In brief,
One ate his bacon, t'other one his beef.




MATTER FOR GRATITUDE

    [Especially should we be thankful for having escaped the
    ravages of the yellow scourge by which our neighbors have
    been so sorely afflicted.--_Governor Stoneman's Thanksgiving
    Proclamation._]


Be pleased, O Lord, to take a people's thanks
That Thine avenging sword has spared our ranks--
That Thou hast parted from our lips the cup
And forced our neighbors' lips to drink it up.
Father of Mercies, with a heart contrite
We thank Thee that Thou goest south to smite,
And sparest San Francisco's loins, to crack
Thy lash on Hermosillo's bleeding back--
That o'er our homes Thine awful angel spread
His wings in vain, and Guaymas weeps instead.

We praise Thee, God, that Yellow Fever here
His horrid banner has not dared to rear,
Consumption's jurisdiction to contest,
Her dagger deep in every second breast!
Catarrh and Asthma and Congestive Chill
Attest Thy bounty and perform Thy will.
These native messengers obey Thy call--
They summon singly, but they summon all.
Not, as in Mexico's impested clime,
Can Yellow Jack commit recurring crime.
We thank Thee that Thou killest all the time.

Thy tender mercies, Father, never end:
Upon all heads Thy blessings still descend,
Though their forms vary. Here the sown seeds yield
Abundant grain that whitens all the field--
There the smit corn stands barren on the plain,
Thrift reaps the straw and Famine gleans in vain.
Here the fat priest to the contented king
Points out the contrast and the people sing--
There mothers eat their offspring. Well, at least
Thou hast provided offspring for the feast.
An earthquake here rolls harmless through the land,
And Thou art good because the chimneys stand--
There templed cities sink into the sea,
And damp survivors, howling as they flee,
Skip to the hills and hold a celebration
In honor of Thy wise discrimination.

O God, forgive them all, from Stoneman down,
Thy smile who construe and expound Thy frown,
And fall with saintly grace upon their knees
To render thanks when Thou dost only sneeze.




THREE KINDS OF A ROGUE


I

Sharon, ambitious of immortal shame,
Fame's dead-wall daubed with his illustrious name--
Served in the Senate, for our sins, his time,
Each word a folly and each vote a crime;
Law for our governance well skilled to make
By knowledge gained in study how to break;
Yet still by the presiding eye ignored,
Which only sought him when too loud he snored.
Auspicious thunder!--when he woke to vote
He stilled his own to cut his country's throat;
That rite performed, fell off again to sleep,
While statesmen ages dead awoke to weep!
For sedentary service all unfit,
By lying long disqualified to sit,
Wasting below as he decayed aloft,
His seat grown harder as his brain grew soft,
He left the hall he could not bring away,
And grateful millions blessed the happy day!
Whate'er contention in that hall is heard,
His sovereign State has still the final word:
For disputatious statesmen when they roar
Startle the ancient echoes of his snore,
Which from their dusty nooks expostulate
And close with stormy clamor the debate.
To low melodious thunders then they fade;
Their murmuring lullabies all ears invade;
Peace takes the Chair; the portal Silence keeps;
No motion stirs the dark Lethean deeps--
Washoe has spoken and the Senate sleeps.


II

Lo! the new Sharon with a new intent,
Making no laws, but keen to circumvent
The laws of Nature (since he can't repeal)
That break his failing body on the wheel.
As Tantalus again and yet again
The elusive wave endeavors to restrain
To slake his awful thirst, so Sharon tries
To purchase happiness that age denies;
Obtains the shadow, but the substance goes,
And hugs the thorn, but cannot keep the rose;
For Dead Sea fruits bids prodigally, eats,
And then, with tardy reformation--cheats.
Alert his faculties as three score years
And four score vices will permit, he nears--
Dicing with Death--the finish of the game,
And curses still his candle's wasting flame,
The narrow circle of whose feeble glow
Dims and diminishes at every throw.
Moments his losses, pleasures are his gains,
Which even in his grasp revert to pains.
The joy of grasping them alone remains.


III

Ring up the curtain and the play protract!
Behold our Sharon in his last mad act.
With man long warring, quarreling with God,
He crouches now beneath a woman's rod
Predestined for his back while yet it lay
Closed in an acorn which, one luckless day,
He stole, unconscious of its foetal twig,
From the scant garner of a sightless pig.
With bleeding shoulders pitilessly scored,
He bawls more lustily than once he snored.
The sympathetic Comstocks droop to hear,
And Carson river sheds a viscous tear,
Which sturdy tumble-bugs assail amain,
With ready thrift, and urge along the plain.
The jackass rabbit sorrows as he lopes;
The sage-brush glooms along the mountain slopes;
In rising clouds the poignant alkali,
Tearless itself, makes everybody cry.
Washoe canaries on the Geiger Grade
Subdue the singing of their cavalcade,
And, wiping with their ears the tears unshed,
Grieve for their family's unlucky head.
Virginia City intermits her trade
And well-clad strangers walk her streets unflayed.
Nay, all Nevada ceases work to weep
And the recording angel goes to sleep.
But in his dreams his goose-quill's creaking fount
Augments the debits in the long account.
And still the continents and oceans ring
With royal torments of the Silver King!
Incessant bellowings fill all the earth,
Mingled with inextinguishable mirth.
He roars, men laugh, Nevadans weep, beasts howl,
Plash the affrighted fish, and shriek the fowl!
With monstrous din their blended thunders rise,
Peal upon peal, and brawl along the skies,
Startle in hell the Sharons as they groan,
And shake the splendors of the great white throne!
Still roaring outward through the vast profound,
The spreading circles of receding sound
Pursue each other in a failing race
To the cold confines of eternal space;
There break and die along that awful shore
Which God's own eyes have never dared explore--
Dark, fearful, formless, nameless evermore!

Look to the west! Against yon steely sky
Lone Mountain rears its holy cross on high.
About its base the meek-faced dead are laid
To share the benediction of its shade.
With crossed white hands, shut eyes and formal feet,
Their nights are innocent, their days discreet.
Sharon, some years, perchance, remain of life--
Of vice and greed, vulgarity and strife;
And then--God speed the day if such His will--
You'll lie among the dead you helped to kill,
And be in good society at last,
Your purse unsilvered and your face unbrassed.




A MAN


Pennoyer, Governor of Oregon,
Casting to South his eye across the bourne
Of his dominion (where the Palmiped,
With leathers 'twixt his toes, paddles his marsh,
Amphibious) saw a rising cloud of hats,
And heard a faint, far sound of distant cheers
Below the swell of the horizon. "Lo,"
Cried one, "the President! the President!"
All footed webwise then took up the word--
The hill tribes and the tribes lacustrine and
The folk riparian and littoral,
Cried with one voice: "The President! He comes!"
And some there were who flung their headgear up
In emulation of the Southern mob;
While some, more soberly disposed, stood still
And silently had fits; and others made
Such reverent genuflexions as they could,
Having that climate in their bones. Then spake
The Court Dunce, humbly, as became him: "Sire,
If thou, as heretofore thou hast, wilt deign
To reap advantage of a fool's advice
By action ordered after nature's way,
As in thy people manifest (for still
Stupidity's the only wisdom) thou
Wilt get thee straight unto to the border land
To mark the President's approach with such
Due, decent courtesy as it shall seem
We have in custom the best warrant for."

Pennoyer, Governor of Oregon,
Eyeing the storm of hats which darkened all
The Southern sky, and hearing far hurrahs
Of an exulting people, answered not.
Then some there were who fell upon their knees,
And some upon their Governor, and sought
Each in his way, by blandishment or force,
To gain his action to their end. "Behold,"
They said, "thy brother Governor to South
Met him even at the gateway of his realm,
Crook-kneed, magnetic-handed and agrin,
Backed like a rainbow--all things done in form
Of due observance and respect. Shall we
Alone of all his servitors refuse
Swift welcome to our master and our lord?"

Pennoyer, Governor of Oregon,
Answered them not, but turned his back to them
And as if speaking to himself, the while
He started to retire, said: "He be damned!"

To that High Place o'er Portland's central block,
Where the Recording Angel stands to view
The sinning world, nor thinks to move his feet
Aside and look below, came flocking up
Inferior angels, all aghast, and cried:
"Pennoyer, Governor of Oregon,
Has said, O what an awful word!--too bad
To be by us repeated!" "Yes, I know,"
Said the superior bird--"I heard it too,
And have already booked it. Pray observe."
Splitting the giant tome, whose covers fell
Apart, o'ershadowing to right and left
The Eastern and the Western world, he showed
The newly written entry, black and big,
Upon the credit side of thine account,
Pennoyer, Governor of Oregon.




Y'E FOE TO CATHAYE


O never an oathe sweares he,
  And never a pig-taile jerkes;
  With a brick-batte he ne lurkes
For to buste y'e crust, perdie,
Of y'e man from over sea,
  A-synging as he werkes.
For he knows ful well, y's youth,
  A tricke of exceeding worth:
And he plans withouten ruth
  A conflagration's birth!




SAMUEL SHORTRIDGE


Like a worn mother he attempts in vain
To still the unruly Crier of his brain:
The more he rocks the cradle of his chin
The more uproarious grows the brat within.




SURPRISED


"O son of mine age, these eyes lose their fire:
Be eyes, I pray, to thy dying sire."

"O father, fear not, for mine eyes are bright--
I read through a millstone at dead of night."

"My son, O tell me, who are those men,
Rushing like pigs to the feeding-pen?"

"Welcomers they of a statesman grand.
They'll shake, and then they will pocket; his hand."

"Sagacious youth, with the wondrous eye,
They seem to throw up their headgear. Why?"

"Because they've thrown up their hands until, O,
They're so tired!--and dinners they've none to throw."

"My son, my son, though dull are mine ears,
I hear a great sound like the people's cheers."

"He's thanking them, father, with tears in his eyes,
For giving him lately that fine surprise."

"My memory fails as I near mine end;
How _did_ they astonish their grateful friend?"

"By letting him buy, like apples or oats,
With that which has made him so good, the votes
Which make him so wise and grand and great.
Now, father, please die, for 'tis growing late."




POSTERITY'S AWARD


I'd long been dead, but I returned to earth.
  Some small affairs posterity was making
A mess of, and I came to see that worth
  Received its dues. I'd hardly finished waking,
The grave-mould still upon me, when my eye
Perceived a statue standing straight and high.

'Twas a colossal figure--bronze and gold--
  Nobly designed, in attitude commanding.
A toga from its shoulders, fold on fold,
  Fell to the pedestal on which 'twas standing.
Nobility it had and splendid grace,
And all it should have had--except a face!

It showed no features: not a trace nor sign
  Of any eyes or nose could be detected--
On the smooth oval of its front no line
  Where sites for mouths are commonly selected.
All blank and blind its faulty head it reared.
Let this be said: 'twas generously eared.

Seeing these things, I straight began to guess
  For whom this mighty image was intended.
"The head," I cried, "is Upton's, and the dress
  Is Parson Bartlett's own." True, _his_ cloak ended
Flush with his lowest vertebra, but no
Sane sculptor ever made a toga so.

Then on the pedestal these words I read:
  "_Erected Eighteen Hundred Ninety-seven_"
(Saint Christofer! how fast the time had sped!
  Of course it naturally does in Heaven)
"_To_ ----" (here a blank space for the name began)
"_The Nineteenth Century's Great Foremost Man_!"

"_Completed_" the inscription ended, "_in
  The Year Three Thousand_"--which was just arriving.
By Jove! thought I, 'twould make the founders grin
  To learn whose fame so long has been surviving--
To read the name posterity will place
In that blank void, and view the finished face.

Even as I gazed, the year Three Thousand came,
  And then by acclamation all the people
Decreed whose was our century's best fame;
  Then scaffolded the statue like a steeple,
To make the likeness; and the name was sunk
Deep in the pedestal's metallic trunk.

Whose was it? Gentle reader, pray excuse
  The seeming rudeness, but I can't consent to
Be so forehanded with important news.
  'Twas neither yours nor mine--let that content you.
If not, the name I must surrender, which,
Upon a dead man's word, was George K. Fitch!




AN ART CRITIC


Ira P. Rankin, you've a nasal name--
I'll sound it through "the speaking-trump of fame,"
And wondering nations, hearing from afar
The brazen twang of its resounding jar,
Shall say: "These bards are an uncommon class--
They blow their noses with a tube of brass!"
Rankin! ye gods! if Influenza pick
Our names at christening, and such names stick,
Let's all be born when summer suns withstand
Her prevalence and chase her from the land,
And healing breezes generously help
To shield from death each ailing human whelp!
"What's in a name?" There's much at least in yours
That the pained ear unwillingly endures,
And much to make the suffering soul, I fear,
Envy the lesser anguish of the ear.

So you object to Cytherea! Do,
The picture was not painted, sir, for you!
_Your_ mind to gratify and taste address,
The masking dove had been a dove the less.
Provincial censor! all untaught in art,
With mind indecent and indecent heart,
Do you not know--nay, why should I explain?
Instruction, argument alike were vain--
I'll show you reasons when you show me brain.




THE SPIRIT OF A SPONGE


I dreamed one night that Stephen Massett died,
And for admission up at Heaven applied.
"Who are you?" asked St. Peter. Massett said:
"Jeems Pipes, of Pipesville." Peter bowed his head,
Opened the gates and said: "I'm glad to know you,
And wish we'd something better, sir, to show you."
"Don't mention it," said Stephen, looking bland,
And was about to enter, hat in hand,
When from a cloud below such fumes arose
As tickled tenderly his conscious nose.
He paused, replaced his hat upon his head,
Turned back and to the saintly warden said,
O'er his already sprouting wings: "I swear
I smell some broiling going on down there!"
So Massett's paunch, attracted by the smell,
Followed his nose and found a place in Hell.




ORNITHANTHROPOS


"Let John P. Irish rise!" the edict rang
As when Creation into being sprang!
Nature, not clearly understanding, tried
To make a bird that on the air could ride.
But naught could baffle the creative plan--
Despite her efforts 'twas almost a man.
Yet he had risen--to the bird a twin--
Had she but fixed a wing upon his chin.




TO E.S. SALOMON

    Who in a Memorial Day oration protested bitterly against
    decorating the graves of Confederate dead.


What! Salomon! such words from you,
  Who call yourself a soldier? Well,
  The Southern brother where he fell
Slept all your base oration through.

Alike to him--he cannot know
  Your praise or blame: as little harm
  Your tongue can do him as your arm
A quarter-century ago.

The brave respect the brave. The brave
  Respect the dead; but _you_--you draw
  That ancient blade, the ass's jaw,
And shake it o'er a hero's grave.

Are you not he who makes to-day
  A merchandise of old renown
  Which he persuades this easy town
He won in battle far away?

Nay, those the fallen who revile
  Have ne'er before the living stood
  And stoutly made their battle good
And greeted danger with a smile.

What if the dead whom still you hate
  Were wrong? Are you so surely right?
  We know the issue of the fight--
The sword is but an advocate.

Men live and die, and other men
  Arise with knowledges diverse:
  What seemed a blessing seems a curse,
And Now is still at odds with Then.

The years go on, the old comes back
  To mock the new--beneath the sun.
  Is _nothing_ new; ideas run
Recurrent in an endless track.

What most we censure, men as wise
  Have reverently practiced; nor
  Will future wisdom fail to war
On principles we dearly prize.

We do not know--we can but deem,
  And he is loyalest and best
  Who takes the light full on his breast
And follows it throughout the dream.

The broken light, the shadows wide--
  Behold the battle-field displayed!
  God save the vanquished from the blade,
The victor from the victor's pride!

If, Salomon, the blessed dew
  That falls upon the Blue and Gray
  Is powerless to wash away
The sin of differing from you.


Remember how the flood of years
  Has rolled across the erring slain;
  Remember, too, the cleansing rain
Of widows' and of orphans' tears.

The dead are dead--let that atone:
  And though with equal hand we strew
  The blooms on saint and sinner too,
Yet God will know to choose his own.

The wretch, whate'er his life and lot,
  Who does not love the harmless dead
  With all his heart and all his head--
May God forgive him--_I_ shall not.

When, Salomon, you come to quaff
  The Darker Cup with meeker face,
  I, loving you at last, shall trace
Upon your tomb this epitaph:

"Draw near, ye generous and brave--
  Kneel round this monument and weep:
  It covers one who tried to keep
A flower from a dead man's grave."




DENNIS KEARNEY


Your influence, my friend, has gathered head--
To east and west its tides encroaching spread.
There'll be, on all God's foot-stool, when they meet,
No clean spot left for God to set His feet.




FINIS AETERNITATIS


Strolling at sunset in my native land,
With fruits and flowers thick on either hand,
    I crossed a Shadow flung athwart my way,
Emerging on a waste of rock and sand.

"The apples all are gone from here," I said,
"The roses perished and their spirits fled.
    I will go back." A voice cried out: "The man
Is risen who eternally was dead!"

I turned and saw an angel standing there,
Newly descended from the heights of air.
    Sweet-eyed compassion filled his face, his hands
A naked sword and golden trumpet bare.

"Nay, 'twas not death, the shadow that I crossed,"
I said. "Its chill was but a touch of frost.
    It made me gasp, but quickly I came through,
With breath recovered ere it scarce was lost."

'Twas the same land! Remembered mountains thrust
Grayed heads asky, and every dragging gust,
    In ashen valleys where my sons had reaped,
Stirred in familiar river-beds the dust.

Some heights, where once the traveler was shown
The youngest and the proudest city known,
    Lifted smooth ridges in the steely light--
Bleak, desolate acclivities of stone.

Where I had worshiped at my father's tomb,
Within a massive temple's awful gloom,
    A jackal slunk along the naked rock,
Affrighted by some prescience of doom.

Man's vestiges were nowhere to be found,
Save one brass mausoleum on a mound
    (I knew it well) spared by the artist Time
To emphasize the desolation round.

Into the stagnant sea the sullen sun
Sank behind bars of crimson, one by one.
    "Eternity's at hand!" I cried aloud.
"Eternity," the angel said, "is done.

For man is ages dead in every zone;
The angels all are dead but I alone;
    The devils, too, are cold enough at last,
And God lies dead before the great white throne!

'Tis foreordained that I bestride the shore
When all are gone (as Gabriel did before,
    When I had throttled the last man alive)
And swear Eternity shall be no more."

"O Azrael--O Prince of Death, declare
Why conquered I the grave?" I cried. "What rare,
    Conspicuous virtues won this boon for me?"
"You've been revived," he said, "to hear me swear."

"Then let me creep again beneath the grass,
And knock thou at yon pompous tomb of brass.
     If ears are what you want, Charles Crocker's there--
Betwixt the greatest ears, the greatest ass."

He rapped, and while the hollow echoes rang,
Out at the door a curst hyena sprang
     And fled! Said Azrael: "His soul's escaped,"
And closed the brazen portal with a bang.




THE VETERAN


John Jackson, once a soldier bold,
    Hath still a martial feeling;
So, when he sees a foe, behold!
    He charges him--with stealing.

He cares not how much ground to-day
    He gives for men to doubt him;
He's used to giving ground, they say,
    Who lately fought with--out him.

When, for the battle to be won,
    His gallantry was needed,
They say each time a loaded gun
    Went off--so, likewise, he did.

And when discharged (for war's a sport
    So hot he had to leave it)
He made a very loud report,
    But no one did believe it.




AN "EXHIBIT"


Goldenson hanged! Well, Heaven forbid
  That I should smile above him:
Though truth to tell, I never did
  Exactly love him.

It can't be wrong, though, to rejoice
  That his unpleasing capers
Are ended. Silent is his voice
  In all the papers.

No longer he's a show: no more,
  Bear-like, his den he's walking.
No longer can he hold the floor
  When I'd be talking.

The laws that govern jails are bad
  If such displays are lawful.
The fate of the assassin's sad,
  But ours is awful!

What! shall a wretch condemned to die
  In shame upon the gibbet
Be set before the public eye
  As an "exhibit"?--

His looks, his actions noted down,
  His words if light or solemn,
And all this hawked about the town--
  So much a column?

The press, of course, will publish news
  However it may get it;
But blast the sheriff who'll abuse
  His powers to let it!

Nay, this is not ingratitude;
  I'm no reporter, truly,
Nor yet an editor. I'm rude
  Because unruly--

Because I burn with shame and rage
  Beyond my power of telling
To see assassins in a cage
  And keepers yelling.

"Walk up! Walk up!" the showman cries:
  "Observe the lion's poses,
His stormy mane, his glooming eyes.
  His--hold your noses!"

How long, O Lord, shall Law and Right
  Be mocked for gain or glory,
And angels weep as they recite
  The shameful story?




THE TRANSMIGRATIONS OF A SOUL


What! Pixley, must I hear you call the roll
Of all the vices that infest your soul?
Was't not enough that lately you did bawl
Your money-worship in the ears of all?[A]
Still must you crack your brazen cheek to tell
That though a miser you're a sot as well?
Still must I hear how low your taste has sunk--
From getting money down to getting drunk?[B]

Who worships money, damning all beside,
And shows his callous knees with pious pride,
Speaks with half-knowledge, for no man e'er scorns
His own possessions, be they coins or corns.
You've money, neighbor; had you gentle birth
You'd know, as now you never can, its worth.

You've money; learning is beyond your scope,
Deaf to your envy, stubborn to your hope.
But if upon your undeserving head
Science and letters had their glory shed;
If in the cavern of your skull the light
Of knowledge shone where now eternal night
Breeds the blind, poddy, vapor-fatted naughts
Of cerebration that you think are thoughts--
Black bats in cold and dismal corners hung
That squeak and gibber when you move your tongue--
You would not write, in Avarice's defense,
A senseless eulogy on lack of sense,
Nor show your eagerness to sacrifice
All noble virtues to one loathsome vice.

You've money; if you'd manners too you'd shame
To boast your weakness or your baseness name.
Appraise the things you have, but measure not
The things denied to your unhappy lot.
He values manners lighter than a cork
Who combs his beard at table with a fork.
Hare to seek sin and tortoise to forsake,
The laws of taste condemn you to the stake
To expiate, where all the world may see,
The crime of growing old disgracefully.

Religion, learning, birth and manners, too,
All that distinguishes a man from you,
Pray damn at will: all shining virtues gain
An added luster from a rogue's disdain.
But spare the young that proselyting sin,
A toper's apotheosis of gin.
If not our young, at least our pigs may claim
Exemption from the spectacle of shame!

Are you not he who lately out of shape
Blew a brass trumpet to denounce the grape?--
Who led the brave teetotalers afield
And slew your leader underneath your shield?--
Swore that no man should drink unless he flung
Himself across your body at the bung?
Who vowed if you'd the power you would fine
The Son of God for making water wine?

All trails to odium you tread and boast,
Yourself enamored of the dirtiest most.
One day to be a miser you aspire,
The next to wallow drunken in the mire;
The third, lo! you're a meritorious liar![C]
Pray, in the catalogue of all your graces,
Have theft and cowardice no honored places?

Yield thee, great Satan--here's a rival name
With all thy vices and but half thy shame!
Quick to the letter of the precept, quick
To the example of the elder Nick;
With as great talent as was e'er applied
To fool a teacher and to fog a guide;
With slack allegiance and boundless greed,
To paunch the profit of a traitor deed,
He aims to make thy glory all his own,
And crowd his master from the infernal throne!


[Footnote A: We are not writing this paragraph for any other purpose
than to protest against this never ending cant, affectation, and
hypocrisy about money. It is one of the best things in this
world--better than religion, or good birth, or learning, or good
manners.--_The Argonaut_.]

[Footnote B: Now, it just occurs to us that some of our temperance
friends will take issue with us, and say that this is bad doctrine,
and that it is ungentlemanly to get drunk under any circumstances
or under any possible conditions. We do not think so.--_The
same_.]

[Footnote C: The man or woman who, for the sake of benefiting others,
protecting them in their lives, property, or reputation, sparing
their feelings, contributing to their enjoyment, or increasing
their pleasures, will tell a lie, deserves to be rewarded.--_The
same_.]




AN ACTOR


Some one ('tis hardly new) has oddly said
The color of a trumpet's blare is red;
And Joseph Emmett thinks the crimson shame
On woman's cheek a trumpet-note of fame.
The more the red storm rises round her nose--
The more her eyes averted seek her toes,
He fancies all the louder he can hear
The tube resounding in his spacious ear,
And, all his varied talents to exert,
Darkens his dullness to display his dirt.
And when the gallery's indecent crowd,
And gentlemen below, with hisses loud,
In hot contention (these his art to crown,
And those his naked nastiness to drown)
Make such a din that cheeks erewhile aflame
Grow white and in their fear forget their shame,
With impudence imperial, sublime,
Unmoved, the patient actor bides his time,
Till storm and counter-storm are both allayed,
Like donkeys, each by t'other one outbrayed.
When all the place is silent as a mouse
One slow, suggestive gesture clears the house!




FAMINE'S REALM


To him in whom the love of Nature has
Imperfectly supplanted the desire
And dread necessity of food, your shore,
Fair Oakland, is a terror. Over all
Your sunny level, from Tamaletown
To where the Pestuary's fragrant slime,
With dead dogs studded, bears its ailing fleet,
Broods the still menace of starvation. Bones
Of men and women bleach along the ways
And pampered vultures sleep upon the trees.
It is a land of death, and Famine there
Holds sovereignty; though some there be her sway
Who challenge, and intrenched in larders live,
Drawing their sustentation from abroad.
But woe to him, the stranger! He shall die
As die the early righteous in the bud
And promise of their prime. He, venturesome
To penetrate the wilds rectangular
Of grass-grown ways luxuriant of blooms,
Frequented of the bee and of the blithe,
Bold squirrel, strays with heedless feet afar
From human habitation and is lost
In mid-Broadway. There hunger seizes him,
And (careless man! deeming God's providence
Extends so far) he has not wherewithal
To bate its urgency. Then, lo! appears
A mealery--a restaurant--a place
Where poison battles famine, and the two,
Like fish-hawks warring in the upper sky
For that which one has taken from the deep,
Manage between them to dispatch the prey.
He enters and leaves hope behind. There ends
His history. Anon his bones, clean-picked
By buzzards (with the bones himself had picked,
Incautious) line the highway. O, my friends,
Of all felonious and deadlywise
Devices of the Enemy of Souls,
Planted along the ways of life to snare
Man's mortal and immortal part alike,
The Oakland restaurant is chief. It lives
That man may die. It flourishes that life
May wither. Its foundation stones repose
On human hearts and hopes. I've seen in it
Crabs stewed in milk and salad offered up
With dressing so unholily compound
That it included flour and sugar! Yea,
I've eaten dog there!--dog, as I'm a man,
Dog seethed in sewage of the town! No more--
Thy hand, Dyspepsia, assumes the pen
And scrawls a tortured "Finis" on the page.




THE MACKAIAD


Mackay's hot wrath to Bonynge, direful spring
Of blows unnumbered, heavenly goddess, sing--
That wrath which hurled to Hellman's office floor
Two heroes, mutually smeared with gore,
Whose hair in handfuls marked the dire debate,
And riven coat-tails testified their hate.
Sing, muse, what first their indignation fired,
What words augmented it, by whom inspired.

First, the great Bonynge comes upon the scene
And asks the favor of the British Queen.
Suppliant he stands and urges all his claim:
His wealth, his portly person and his name,
His habitation in the setting sun,
As child of nature; and his suit he won.
No more the Sovereign, wearied with his plea,
From slumber's chain her faculties can free.
Low and more low the royal eyelids creep,
She gives the assenting nod and falls asleep.
Straightway the Bonynges all invade the Court
And telegraph the news to every port.
Beneath the seas, red-hot, the tidings fly,
The cables crinkle and the fishes fry!
The world, awaking like a startled bat,
Exclaims: "A Bonynge? What the devil's that?"
Mackay, meanwhile, to envy all attent,
Untaught to spare, unable to relent,
Walks in our town on needles and on pins,
And in a mean, revengeful spirit--grins!

Sing, muse, what next to break the peace occurred--
What act uncivil, what unfriendly word?
The god of Bosh ascending from his pool,
Where since creation he has played the fool,
Clove the blue slush, as other gods the sky,
And, waiting but a moment's space to dry,
Touched Bonynge with his finger-tip. "O son,"
He said, "alike of nature and a gun,
Knowest not Mackay's insufferable sin?
Hast thou not heard that he doth stand and grin?
Arise! assert thy manhood, and attest
The uncommercial spirit in thy breast.
Avenge thine honor, for by Jove I swear
Thou shalt not else be my peculiar care!"
He spake, and ere his worshiper could kneel
Had dived into his slush pool, head and heel.
Full of the god and to revenges nerved,
And conscious of a will that never swerved,
Bonynge set sail: the world beyond the wave
As gladly took him as the other gave.
New York received him, but a shudder ran
Through all the western coast, which knew the man;
And science said that the seismic action
Was owing to an asteroid's impaction.

O goddess, sing what Bonynge next essayed.
Did he unscabbard the avenging blade,
The long spear brandish and porrect the shield,
Havoc the town and devastate the field?
His sacred thirst for blood did he allay
By halving the unfortunate Mackay?
Small were the profit and the joy to him
To hew a base-born person, limb from limb.
Let vulgar souls to low revenge incline,
That of diviner spirits is divine.
Bonynge at noonday stood in public places
And (with regard to the Mackays) made faces!
Before those formidable frowns and scowls
The dogs fled, tail-tucked, with affrighted howls,
And horses, terrified, with flying feet
O'erthrew the apple-stands along the street,
Involving the metropolis in vast
Financial ruin! Man himself, aghast,
Retreated east and west and north and south
Before the menace of that twisted mouth,
Till Jove, in answer to their prayers, sent Night
To veil the dreadful visage from their sight!

Such were the causes of the horrid strife--
The mother-wrongs which nourished it to life.
O, for a quill from an archangel's wing!
O, for a voice that's adequate to sing
The splendor and the terror of the fray,
The scattered hair, the coat-tails all astray,
The parted collars and the gouts of gore
Reeking and smoking on the banker's floor,
The interlocking limbs, embraces dire,
Revolving bodies and deranged attire!

Vain, vain the trial: 'tis vouchsafed to none
To sing two millionaires rolled into one!
My hand and pen their offices refuse,
And hoarse and hoarser grows the weary muse.
Alone remains, to tell of the event,
Abandoned, lost and variously rent,
The Bonynge nethermost habiliment.




A SONG IN PRAISE


Hail, blessed Blunder! golden idol, hail!--
Clay-footed deity of all who fail.
Celestial image, let thy glory shine,
Thy feet concealing, but a lamp to mine.
Let me, at seasons opportune and fit,
By turns adore thee and by turns commit.
In thy high service let me ever be
(Yet never serve thee as my critics me)
Happy and fallible, content to feel
I blunder chiefly when to thee I kneel.
But best felicity is his thy praise
Who utters unaware in works and ways--
Who _laborare est orare_ proves,
And feels thy suasion wheresoe'er he moves,
Serving thy purpose, not thine altar, still,
And working, for he thinks it his, thy will.
If such a life with blessings be not fraught,
I envy Peter Robertson for naught.




A POET'S FATHER


Welcker, I'm told, can boast a father great
And honored in the service of the State.
Public Instruction all his mind employs--
He guides its methods and its wage enjoys.
Prime Pedagogue, imperious and grand,
He waves his ferule o'er a studious land
Where humming youth, intent upon the page,
Thirsting for knowledge with a noble rage,
Drink dry the whole Pierian spring and ask
To slake their fervor at his private flask.
Arrested by the terror of his frown,
The vaulting spit-ball drops untimely down;
The fly impaled on the tormenting pin
Stills in his awful glance its dizzy din;
Beneath that stern regard the chewing-gum
Which writhed and squeaked between the teeth is dumb;
Obedient to his will the dunce-cap flies
To perch upon the brows of the unwise;
The supple switch forsakes the parent wood
To settle where 'twill do the greatest good,
Puissant still, as when of old it strove
With Solomon for spitting on the stove
Learned Professor, variously great,
Guide, guardian, instructor of the State--
Quick to discern and zealous to correct
The faults which mar the public intellect
From where of Siskiyou the northern bound
Is frozen eternal to the sunless ground
To where in San Diego's torrid clime
The swarthy Greaser swelters in his grime--
Beneath your stupid nose can you not see
The dunce whom once you dandled on your knee?
O mighty master of a thousand schools,
Stop teaching wisdom, or stop breeding fools.




A COWARD


When Pickering, distressed by an "attack,"
Has the strange insolence to answer back
He hides behind a name that is a lie,
And out of shadow falters his reply.
God knows him, though--identified alike
By hardihood to rise and fear to strike,
And fitly to rebuke his sins decrees,
That, hide from others with what care he please,
Night sha'n't be black enough nor earth so wide
That from himself himself can ever hide!
Hard fate indeed to feel at every breath
His burden of identity till death!--
No moment's respite from the immortal load,
To think himself a serpent or a toad,
Or dream, with a divine, ecstatic glow,
He's long been dead and canonized a crow!




TO MY LIARS


Attend, mine enemies of all degrees,
From sandlot orators and sandlot fleas
To fallen gentlemen and rising louts
Who babble slander at your drinking bouts,
And, filled with unfamiliar wine, begin
Lies drowned, ere born, in more congenial gin.
But most attend, ye persons of the press
Who live (though why, yourselves alone can guess)
In hope deferred, ambitious still to shine
By hating me at half a cent a line--
Like drones among the bees of brighter wing,
Sunless to shine and impotent to sting.
To estimate in easy verse I'll try
The controversial value of a lie.
So lend your ears--God knows you have enough!--
I mean to teach, and if I can't I'll cuff.

A lie is wicked, so the priests declare;
But that to us is neither here nor there.
'Tis worse than wicked, it is vulgar too;
_N'importe_--with that we've nothing here to do.
If 'twere artistic I would lie till death,
And shape a falsehood with my latest breath.
Parrhasius never more did pity lack,
The while his model writhed upon the rack,
Than I for my collaborator's pain,
Who, stabbed with fibs again and yet again,
Would vainly seek to move my stubborn heart
If slander were, and wit were not, an art.
The ill-bred and illiterate can lie
As fast as you, and faster far than I.
Shall I compete, then, in a strife accurst
Where Allen Forman is an easy first,
And where the second prize is rightly flung
To Charley Shortridge or to Mike de Young?

In mental combat but a single end
Inspires the formidable to contend.
Not by the raw recruit's ambition fired,
By whom foul blows, though harmless, are admired;
Not by the coward's zeal, who, on his knee
Behind the bole of his protecting tree,
So curves his musket that the bark it fits,
And, firing, blows the weapon into bits;
But with the noble aim of one whose heart
Values his foeman for he loves his art
The veteran debater moves afield,
Untaught to libel as untaught to yield.
Dear foeman mine, I've but this end in view--
That to prevent which most you wish to do.
What, then, are you most eager to be at?
To hate me? Nay, I'll help you, sir, at that.
This only passion does your soul inspire:
You wish to scorn me. Well, you shall admire.

'Tis not enough my neighbors that you school
In the belief that I'm a rogue or fool;
That small advantage you would gladly trade
For what one moment would _yourself_ persuade.
Write, then, your largest and your longest lie:
_You_ sha'n't believe it, howsoe'er you try.
No falsehood you can tell, no evil do,
Shall turn me from the truth to injure you.
So all your war is barren of effect;
I find my victory in your respect.
What profit have you if the world you set
Against me? For the world will soon forget
It thought me this or that; but I'll retain
A vivid picture of your moral stain,
And cherish till my memory expire
The sweet, soft consciousness that you're a liar
Is it _your_ triumph, then, to prove that you
Will do the thing that I would scorn to do?
God grant that I forever be exempt
From such advantage as my foe's contempt.




"PHIL" CRIMMINS


Still as he climbed into the public view
His charms of person more apparent grew,
Till the pleased world that watched his airy grace
Saw nothing of him but his nether face--
Forgot his follies with his head's retreat,
And blessed his virtues as it viewed their seat.




CODEX HONORIS


Jacob Jacobs, of Oakland, he swore:
"Dat Solomon Martin--I'll haf his gore!"
Solomon Martin, of Oakland, he said:
"Of Shacob Shacobs der bleed I vill shed!"
So they met, with seconds and surgeon at call,
And fought with pistol and powder and--all
Was done in good faith,--as before I said,
They fought with pistol and powder and--shed
Tears, O my friends, for each other they marred
Fighting with pistol and powder and--lard!
For the lead had been stolen away, every trace,
And Christian hog-product supplied its place.
Then the shade of Moses indignant arose:
"Quvicker dan lighdnings go vosh yer glose!"
Jacob Jacobs, of Oakland, they say,
Applied for a pension the following day.
Solomon Martin, of Oakland, I hear,
Will call himself Colonel for many a year.




TO W.H.L.B.


Refrain, dull orator, from speaking out,
For silence deepens when you raise the shout;
But when you hold your tongue we hear, at least,
Your noise in mastering that little beast.




EMANCIPATION


Behold! the days of miracle at last
Return--if ever they were truly past:
From sinful creditors' unholy greed
The church called Calvary at last is freed--
So called for there the Savior's crucified,
Roberts and Carmany on either side.

The circling contribution-box no more
Provokes the nod and simulated snore;
No more the Lottery, no more the Fair,
Lure the reluctant dollar from its lair,
Nor Ladies' Lunches at a bit a bite
Destroy the health yet spare the appetite,
While thrifty sisters o'er the cauldron stoop
To serve their God with zeal, their friends with soup,
And all the brethren mendicate the earth
With viewless placards: "We've been _so_ from birth!"

Sure of his wage, the pastor now can lend
His whole attention to his latter end,
Remarking with a martyr's prescient thrill
The Hemp maturing on the cheerless Hill.
The holy brethren, lifting pious palms,
Pour out their gratitude in prayer and psalms,
Chant _De Profundis_, meaning "out of debt,"
And dance like mad--or would if they were let.

Deeply disguised (a deacon newly dead
Supplied the means) Jack Satan holds his head
As high as any and as loudly sings
His _jubilate_ till each rafter rings.
"Rejoice, ye ever faithful," bellows he,
"The debt is lifted and the temple free!"
Then says, aside, with gentle cachination:
"I've got a mortgage on the congregation."




JOHNDONKEY

    [There isn't a man living who does not have at least a
    sneaking reverence for a horse-shoe.--_Evening Post_.]


Thus the poor ass whose appetite has ne'er
Known than the thistle any sweeter fare
Thinks all the world eats thistles. Thus the clown,
The wit and Mentor of the country town,
Grins through the collar of a horse and thinks
Others for pleasure do as he for drinks,
Though secretly, because unwilling still
In public to attest their lack of skill.
Each dunce whose life and mind all follies mar
Believes as he is all men living are--
His vices theirs, their understandings his;
Naught that he knows not, all he fancies, _is_.
How odd that any mind such stuff should boast!
How natural to write it in the _Post_!




HELL


The friends who stood about my bed
Looked down upon my face and said:
"God's will be done--the fellow's dead."

When from my body I was free
I straightway felt myself, ah me!
Sink downward to the life to be.

Full twenty centuries I fell,
And then alighted. "Here you dwell
For aye," a Voice cried--"this is Hell!"

A landscape lay about my feet,
Where trees were green and flowers sweet.
The climate was devoid of heat.

The sun looked down with gentle beam
Upon the bosom of the stream,
Nor saw I any sign of steam.

The waters by the sky were tinged,
The hills with light and color fringed.
Birds warbled on the wing unsinged.

"Ah, no, this is not Hell," I cried;
"The preachers ne'er so greatly lied.
This is Earth's spirit glorified!

"Good souls do not in Hades dwell,
And, look, there's John P. Irish!" "Well,"
The Voice said, "that's what makes it Hell."




BY FALSE PRETENSES


John S. Hittell, whose sovereign genius wields
The quill his tributary body yields;
The author of an opera--that is,
All but the music and libretto's his:
A work renowned, whose formidable name,
Linked with his own, repels the assault of fame
From the high vantage of a dusty shelf,
Secure from all the world except himself;--
Who told the tale of "Culture" in a screed
That all might understand if some would read;--
Master of poesy and lord of prose,
Dowered, like a setter, with a double nose;
That one for Erato, for Clio this;
He flushes both--not his fault if we miss;--
Judge of the painter's art, who'll straight proclaim
The hue of any color you can name,
And knows a painting with a canvas back
Distinguished from a duck by the duck's quack;--
This thinker and philosopher, whose work
Is famous from Commercial street to Turk,
Has got a fortune now, his talent's meed.
A woman left it him who could not read,
And so went down to death's eternal night
Sweetly unconscious that the wretch could write.




LUCIFER OF THE TORCH


O Reverend Ravlin, once with sounding lung
You shook the bloody banner of your tongue,
Urged all the fiery boycotters afield
And swore you'd rather follow them than yield,
Alas, how brief the time, how great the change!--
Your dogs of war are ailing all of mange;
The loose leash dangles from your finger-tips,
But the loud "havoc" dies upon your lips.
No spirit animates your feeble clay--
You'd rather yield than even run away.
In vain McGlashan labors to inspire
Your pallid nostril with his breath of fire:
The light of battle's faded from your face--
You keep the peace, John Chinaman his place.
O Ravlin, what cold water, thrown by whom
Upon the kindling Boycott's ruddy bloom,
Has slaked your parching blood-thirst and allayed
The flash and shimmer of your lingual blade?
Your salary--your salary's unpaid!

In the old days, when Christ with scourges drave
The Ravlins headlong from the Temple's nave,
Each bore upon his pelt the mark divine--
The Boycott's red authenticating sign.
Birth-marked forever in surviving hurts,
Glowing and smarting underneath their shirts,
Successive Ravlins have revenged their shame
By blowing every coal and flinging flame.
And you, the latest (may you be the last!)
Endorsed with that hereditary, vast
And monstrous rubric, would the feud prolong,
Save that cupidity forbids the wrong.
In strife you preferably pass your days--
But brawl no moment longer than it pays.
By shouting when no more you can incite
The dogs to put the timid sheep to flight
To load, for you, the brambles with their fleece,
You cackle concord to congenial geese,
Put pinches of goodwill upon their tails
And pluck them with a touch that never fails.




THE "WHIRLIGIG OF TIME"


Dr. Jewell speaks of Balaam
And his vices, to assail 'em.
Ancient enmities how cruel!--
Balaam cudgeled once a Jewell.




A RAILROAD LACKEY


Ben Truman, you're a genius and can write,
  Though one would not suspect it from your looks.
You lack that certain spareness which is quite
  Distinctive of the persons who make books.
  You show the workmanship of Stanford's cooks
About the region of the appetite,
Where geniuses are singularly slight.
Your friends the Chinamen are understood,
Indeed, to speak of you as "belly good."

Still, you can write--spell, too, I understand--
  Though how two such accomplishments can go,
Like sentimental schoolgirls, hand in hand
  Is more than ever I can hope to know.
  To have one talent good enough to show
Has always been sufficient to command
The veneration of the brilliant band
Of railroad scholars, who themselves, indeed,
Although they cannot write, can mostly read.

There's Towne and Fillmore, Goodman and Steve Gage,
  Ned Curtis of Napoleonic face,
Who used to dash his name on glory's page
  "A.M." appended to denote his place
  Among the learned. Now the last faint trace
Of Nap. is all obliterate with age,
And Ned's degree less precious than his wage.
He says: "I done it," with his every breath.
"Thou canst not say I did it," says Macbeth.

Good land! how I run on! I quite forgot
  Whom this was meant to be about; for when
I think upon that odd, unearthly lot--
  Not quite Creedhaymonds, yet not wholly men--
  I'm dominated by my rebel pen
That, like the stubborn bird from which 'twas got,
Goes waddling forward if I will or not.
To leave your comrades, Ben, I'm now content:
I'll meet them later if I don't repent.

You've writ a letter, I observe--nay, more,
  You've published it--to say how good you think
The coolies, and invite them to come o'er
  In thicker quantity. Perhaps you drink
No corporation's wine, but love its ink;
Or when you signed away your soul and swore
On railrogue battle-fields to shed your gore
You mentally reserved the right to shed
The raiment of your character instead.

You're naked, anyhow: unragged you stand
  In frank and stark simplicity of shame.
And here upon your flank, in letters grand,
  The iron has marked you with your owner's name.
  Needless, for none would steal and none reclaim.
  But "Leland $tanford" is a pretty brand,
Wrought by an artist with a cunning hand
But come--this naked unreserve is flat:
Don your habiliment--you're fat, you're fat!




THE LEGATEE


In fair San Francisco a good man did dwell,
And he wrote out a will, for he didn't feel well,
Said he: "It is proper, when making a gift,
To stimulate virtue by comforting thrift."

So he left all his property, legal and straight,
To "the cursedest rascal in all of the State."
But the name he refused to insert, for, said he;
"Let each man consider himself legatee."

In due course of time that philanthropist died,
And all San Francisco, and Oakland beside--
Save only the lawyers--came each with his claim
The lawyers preferring to manage the same.

The cases were tried in Department Thirteen,
Judge Murphy presided, sedate and serene,
But couldn't quite specify, legal and straight,
The cursedest rascal in all of the State.

And so he remarked to them, little and big--
To claimants: "You skip!" and to lawyers: "You dig!"
They tumbled, tumultuous, out of his court
And left him victorious, holding the fort.

'Twas then that he said: "It is plain to my mind
This property's ownerless--how can I find
The cursedest rascal in all of the State?"
So he took it himself, which was legal and straight.




"DIED OF A ROSE"


A reporter he was, and he wrote, wrote he:
  "The grave was covered as thick as could be
  With floral tributes"--which reading,
The editor man he said, he did so:
  "For 'floral tributes' he's got for to go,
  For I hold the same misleading."
Then he called him in and he pointed sweet
To a blooming garden across the street,
  Inquiring: "What's them a-growing?"
The reporter chap said: "Why, where's your eyes?
Them's floral tributes!" "Arise, arise,"
  The editor said, "and be going."




A LITERARY HANGMAN


Beneath his coat of dirt great Neilson loves
  To hide the avenging rope.
He handles all he touches without gloves,
  Excepting soap.




AT THE ELEVENTH HOUR


As through the blue expanse he skims
  On joyous wings, the late
Frank Hutchings overtakes Miss Sims,
  Both bound for Heaven's high gate.

In life they loved and (God knows why
  A lover so should sue)
He slew her, on the gallows high
  Died pious--and they flew.

Her pinions were bedraggled, soiled
  And torn as by a gale,
While his were bright--all freshly oiled
  The feathers of his tail.

Her visage, too, was stained and worn
  And menacing and grim;
His sweet and mild--you would have sworn
  That _she_ had murdered _him_.

When they'd arrived before the gate
  He said to her: "My dear,
'Tis hard once more to separate,
  But _you_ can't enter here.

"For you, unluckily, were sent
  So quickly to the grave
You had no notice to repent,
  Nor time your soul to save."

"'Tis true," said she, "and I should wail
  In Hell even now, but I
Have lingered round the county jail
  To see a Christian die."




A CONTROVERSIALIST


I've sometimes wished that Ingersoll were wise
To hold his tongue, nor rail against the skies;
  For when he's made a point some pious dunce
Like Bartlett of the _Bulletin_ "replies."

I brandish no iconoclastic fist,
Nor enter the debate an atheist;
  But when they say there is a God I ask
Why Bartlett, then, is suffered to exist.

Even infidels that logic might resent,
Saying: "There's no place for his punishment
  That's worse than earth." But humbly I submit
That he would make a hell wherever sent.




MENDAX


High Lord of Liars, Pickering, to thee
Let meaner mortals bend the subject knee!
Thine is mendacity's imperial crown,
Alike by genius, action and renown.
No man, since words could set a cheek aflame
E'er lied so greatly with so little shame!
O bad old man, must thy remaining years
Be passed in leading idiots by their ears--
Thine own (which Justice, if she ruled the roast
Would fasten to the penitential post)
Still wagging sympathetically--hung
the same rocking-bar that bears thy tongue?

Thou dog of darkness, dost thou hope to stay
Time's dread advance till thou hast had thy day?
Dost think the Strangler will release his hold
Because, forsooth, some fibs remain untold?
No, no--beneath thy multiplying load
Of years thou canst not tarry on the road
To dabble in the blood thy leaden feet
Have pressed from bosoms that have ceased to beat
Of reputations margining thy way,
Nor wander from the path new truth to slay.
Tell to thyself whatever lies thou wilt,
Catch as thou canst at pennies got by guilt--
Straight down to death this blessed year thou'lt sink,
Thy life washed out as with a wave of ink.
But if this prophecy be not fulfilled,
And thou who killest patience be not killed;
If age assail in vain and vice attack
Only by folly to be beaten back;
Yet Nature can this consolation give:
The rogues who die not are condemned to live!




THE RETROSPECTIVE BIRD


His caw is a cackle, his eye is dim,
And he mopes all day on the lowest limb;
Not a word says he, but he snaps his bill
And twitches his palsied head, as a quill,
The ultimate plume of his pride and hope,
Quits his now featherless nose-of-the-Pope,
Leaving that eminence brown and bare
Exposed to the Prince of the Power of the Air.
And he sits and he thinks: "I'm an old, old man,
Mateless and chickless, the last of my clan,
But I'd give the half of the days gone by
To perch once more on the branches high,
And hear my great-grand-daddy's comical croaks
In authorized versions of _Bulletin_ jokes."




THE OAKLAND DOG


I lay one happy night in bed
And dreamed that all the dogs were dead.
They'd all been taken out and shot--
Their bodies strewed each vacant lot.

O'er all the earth, from Berkeley down
To San Leandro's ancient town,
And out in space as far as Niles--
I saw their mortal parts in piles.

One stack upreared its ridge so high
Against the azure of the sky
That some good soul, with pious views,
Put up a steeple and sold pews.

No wagging tail the scene relieved:
I never in my life conceived
(I swear it on the Decalogue!)
Such penury of living dog.

The barking and the howling stilled,
The snarling with the snarler killed,
All nature seemed to hold its breath:
The silence was as deep as death.

True, candidates were all in roar
On every platform, as before;
And villains, as before, felt free
To finger the calliope.

True, the Salvationist by night,
And milkman in the early light,
The lonely flutist and the mill
Performed their functions with a will.

True, church bells on a Sunday rang
The sick man's curtain down--the bang
Of trains, contesting for the track,
Out of the shadow called him back.

True, cocks, at all unheavenly hours,
Crew with excruciating powers,
Cats on the woodshed rang and roared,
Fat citizens and fog-horns snored.

But this was all too fine for ears
Accustomed, through the awful years,
To the nocturnal monologues
And day debates of Oakland dogs.

And so the world was silent. Now
What else befell--to whom and how?
_Imprimis_, then, there were no fleas,
And days of worth brought nights of ease.

Men walked about without the dread
Of being torn to many a shred,
Each fragment holding half a cruse
Of hydrophobia's quickening juice.

They had not to propitiate
Some curst kioodle at each gate,
But entered one another's grounds,
Unscared, and were not fed to hounds.

Women could drive and not a pup
Would lift the horse's tendons up
And let them go--to interject
A certain musical effect.

Even children's ponies went about,
All grave and sober-paced, without
A bulldog hanging to each nose--
Proud of his fragrance, I suppose.

Dog being dead, Man's lawless flame
Burned out: he granted Woman's claim,
Children's and those of country, art--
all took lodgings in his heart.

When memories of his former shame
Crimsoned his cheeks with sudden flame
He said; "I know my fault too well--
They fawned upon me and I fell."

Ah! 'twas a lovely world!--no more
I met that indisposing bore,
The unseraphic cynogogue--
The man who's proud to love a dog.

Thus in my dream the golden reign
Of Reason filled the world again,
And all mankind confessed her sway,
From Walnut Creek to San Jose.




THE UNFALLEN BRAVE


Not all in sorrow and in tears,
To pay of gratitude's arrears
  The yearly sum--
Not prompted, wholly by the pride
Of those for whom their friends have died,
  To-day we come.

Another aim we have in view
Than for the buried boys in blue
  To drop a tear:
Memorial Day revives the chin
Of Barnes, and Salomon chimes in--
  That's why we're here.

And when in after-ages they
Shall pass, like mortal men, away,
  Their war-song sung,
Then fame will tell the tale anew
Of how intrepidly they drew
  The deadly tongue.

Then cull white lilies for the graves
Of Liberty's loquacious braves,
  And roses red.
Those represent their livers, these
The blood that in unmeasured seas
  They did not shed.




A CELEBRATED CASE


Way down in the Boom Belt lived Mrs. Roselle;
A person named Petrie, he lived there as well;
But Mr. Roselle he resided away--
Sing tooral iooral iooral iay.

Once Mrs. Roselle in her room was alone:
The flesh of her flesh and the bone of her bone
Neglected the wife of his bosom to woo--
Sing tooral iooral iooral ioo.

Then Petrie, her lover, appeared at the door,
Remarking: "My dear; I don't love you no more."
"That's awfully rough," said the lady, "on me--
Sing tooral iooral iooral iee."

"Come in, Mr. Petrie," she added, "pray do:
Although you don't love me no more, I love you.
Sit down while I spray you with vitriol now--
Sing tooral iooral iooral iow."

Said Petrie: "That liquid I know won't agree
With my beauty, and then you'll no longer love me;
So spray and be "--O, what a word he did say!--
Sing tooral iooral iooral iay.

She deluged his head and continued to pour
Till his bonny blue eyes, like his love, were no more.
It was seldom he got such a hearty shampoo--
Sing tooral iooral iooral ioo.

Then Petrie he rose and said: "Mrs. Roselle,
I have an engagement and bid you farewell."
"You see," she began to explain--but not he!--
Sing tooral, iooral, iooral iee.

The Sheriff he came and he offered his arm,
Saying, "Sorry I am for disturbin' you, marm,
But business is business." Said she, "So they say--
Sing tooral, iooral, iooral iay."

The Judge on the bench he looked awfully stern;
The District Attorney began to attorn;
The witnesses lied and the lawyers--O my!--
Sing tooral, iooral, iooral iyi.

The chap that defended her said: "It's our claim
That he loved us no longer and told us the same.
What else than we did could we decently do?--
Sing tooral, iooral, iooral ioo."

The District Attorney, sarcastic, replied:
"We loved you no longer--that can't be denied.
Not having no eyes we may dote on you now--
Sing tooral, iooral, iooral iow."

The prisoner wept to entoken her fears;
The sockets of Petrie were flooded with tears.
O heaven-born Sympathy, bully for you!--
Sing tooral, iooral, iooral ioo.

Four jurors considered the prisoner mad,
And four thought her victim uncommonly bad,
And four that the acid was all in his eye--
Sing rum tiddy iddity iddity hi.




COUPLETS

    Intended for Inscription on a Sword Presented to Colonel
    Cutting of the National Guard of California.


I am for Cutting. I'm a blade
Designed for use at dress parade.
My gleaming length, when I display
Peace rules the land with gentle sway;
But when the war-dogs bare their teeth
Go seek me in the modest sheath.
I am for Cutting. Not for me
The task of setting nations free.
Let soulless blades take human life,
My softer metal shuns the strife.
The annual review is mine,
When gorgeous shopmen sweat and shine,
And Biddy, tip-toe on the pave,
Adores the cobble-trotting brave.
I am for Cutting. 'Tis not mine
To hew amain the hostile line;
Not mine all pitiless to spread
The plain with tumuli of dead.
My grander duty lies afar
From haunts of the insane hussar,
Where charging horse and struggling foot
Are grimed alike with cannon-soot.
When Loveliness and Valor meet
Beneath the trees to dance, and eat,
And sing, and much beside, behold
My golden glories all unfold!
There formidably are displayed
The useful horrors of my blade
In time of feast and dance and ballad,
I am for cutting chicken salad.




A RETORT


As vicious women think all men are knaves,
And shrew-bound gentlemen discourse of slaves;
As reeling drunkards judge the world unsteady
And idlers swear employers ne'er get ready--
Thieves that the constable stole all they had,
The mad that all except themselves are mad;
So, in another's clear escutcheon shown,
Barnes rails at stains reflected from his own;
Prates of "docility," nor feels the dark
Ring round his neck--the Ralston collar mark.
Back, man, to studies interrupted once,
Ere yet the rogue had merged into the dunce.
Back, back to Yale! and, grown with years discreet,
The course a virgin's lust cut short, complete.
Go drink again at the Pierian pool,
And learn--at least to better play the fool.
No longer scorn the draught, although the font,
Unlike Pactolus, waters not Belmont.




A VISION OF RESURRECTION


I had a dream. The habitable earth--
Its continents and islands, all were bare
Of cities and of forests. Naught remained
Of its old aspect, and I only knew
(As men know things in dreams, unknowing how)
That this was earth and that all men were dead.
On every side I saw the barren land,
Even to the distant sky's inclosing blue,
Thick-pitted all with graves; and all the graves
Save one were open--not as newly dug,
But rather as by some internal force
Riven for egress. Tombs of stone were split
And wide agape, and in their iron decay
The massive mausoleums stood in halves.
With mildewed linen all the ground was white.
Discarded shrouds upon memorial stones
Hung without motion in the soulless air.
While greatly marveling how this should be
I heard, or fancied that I heard, a voice,
Low like an angel's, delicately strong,
And sweet as music.

                    --"Spirit," it said, "behold
The burial place of universal Man!
A million years have rolled away since here
His sheeted multitudes (save only some
Whose dark misdeeds required a separate
And individual arraignment) rose
To judgment at the trumpet's summoning
And passed into the sky for their award,
Leaving behind these perishable things
Which yet, preserved by miracle, endure
Till all are up. Then they and all of earth,
Rock-hearted mountain and storm-breasted sea,
River and wilderness and sites of dead
And vanished capitals of men, shall spring
To flame, and naught shall be for evermore!
When all are risen that wonder will occur.
'Twas but ten centuries ago the last
But one came forth--a soul so black with sin,
Against whose name so many crimes were set
That only now his trial is at end.
But one remains."

Straight, as the voice was stilled--
That single rounded mound cracked lengthliwise
And one came forth in grave-clothes. For a space
He stood and gazed about him with a smile
Superior; then laying off his shroud
Disclosed his two attenuated legs
Which, like parentheses, bent outwardly
As by the weight of saintliness above,
And so sprang upward and was lost to view
Noting his headstone overthrown, I read:
"Sacred to memory of George K. Fitch,
Deacon and Editor--a holy man
Who fell asleep in Jesus, full of years
And blessedness. The dead in Christ rise first."




MASTER OF THREE ARTS


Your various talents, Goldenson, command
  Respect: you are a poet and can draw.
It is a pity that your gifted hand
  Should ever have been raised against the law.
If you had drawn no pistol, but a picture,
You would have saved your throttle from a stricture.

About your poetry I'm not so sure:
  'Tis certain we have much that's quite as bad,
Whose hardy writers have not to endure
  The hangman's fondling. It is said they're mad:
Though lately Mr. Brooks (I mean the poet)
Looked well, and if demented didn't show it.

Well, Goldenson, I am a poet, too--
  Taught by the muses how to smite the harp
And lift the tuneful voice, although, like you
  And Brooks, I sometimes flat and sometimes sharp.
But let me say, with no desire to taunt you,
I never murder even the girls I want to.

I hold it one of the poetic laws
  To sing of life, not take. I've ever shown
A high regard for human life because
  I have such trouble to support my own.
And you--well, you'll find trouble soon in blowing
Your private coal to keep it red and glowing.

I fancy now I see you at the Gate
  Approach St. Peter, crawling on your belly,
You cry: "Good sir, take pity on my state--
  Forgive the murderer of Mamie Kelly!"
And Peter says: "O, that's all right--but, mister,
You scribbled rhymes. In Hell I'll make you
     blister!"




THERSITES


So, in the Sunday papers _you_, Del Mar,
    Damn, all great Englishmen in English speech?
    I am no Englishman, but in my reach
A rogue shall never rail where heroes are.

You are the man, if I mistake you not,
    Who lately with a supplicating twitch
    Plucked at the pockets of the London rich
And paid your share-engraver all you got.

Because that you have greatly lied, because
    You libel nations, and because no hand
    Of officer is raised to bid you stand,
And falsehood is unpunished of the laws,

I stand here in a public place to mark
    With level finger where you part the crowd--
    I stand to name you and to cry aloud:
"Behold mendacity's great hierarch!"




A SOCIETY LEADER


"The Social World"! O what a world it is--
  Where full-grown men cut capers in the German,
Cotillion, waltz, or what you will, and whizz
  And spin and hop and sprawl about like mermen!
  I wonder if our future Grant or Sherman,
As these youths pass their time, is passing his--
  If eagles ever come from painted eggs,
  Or deeds of arms succeed to deeds of legs.

I know they tell us about Waterloo:
  How, "foremost fighting," fell the evening's
    dancers.
I don't believe it: I regard it true
  That soldiers who are skillful in "the Lancers"
  Less often die of cannon than of cancers.
Moreover, I am half-persuaded, too,
  That David when he danced before the Ark
  Had the reporter's word to keep it dark.

Ed. Greenway, you fatigue. Your hateful name
  Like maiden's curls, is in the papers daily.
You think it, doubtless, honorable fame,
  And contemplate the cheap distinction gaily,
  As does the monkey the blue-painted tail he
Believes becoming to him. 'Tis the same
  With men as other monkeys: all their souls
  Crave eminence on any kind of poles.
But cynics (barking tribe!) are all agreed
  That monkeys upon poles performing capers
Are not exalted, they are only "treed."
  A glory that is kindled by the papers
  Is transient as the phosphorescent vapors
That shine in graveyards and are seen, indeed,
  But while the bodies that supply the gas
  Are turning into weeds to feed an ass.

One can but wonder sometimes how it feels
  To _be_ an ass--a beast we beat condignly
Because, like yours, his life is in his heels
  And he is prone to use them unbenignly.
  The ladies (bless them!) say you dance divinely.
I like St. Vitus better, though, who deals
  His feet about him with a grace more just,
  And hops, not for he will, but for he must.

Doubtless it gratifies you to observe
  Elbowy girls and adipose mamas
All looking adoration as you swerve
  This way and that; but prosperous papas
  Laugh in their sleeves at you, and their ha-has,
If heard, would somewhat agitate your nerve.
  And dames and maids who keep you on their
    shelves
Don't seem to want a closer tie themselves.

Gods! what a life you live!--by day a slave
  To your exacting back and urgent belly;
Intent to earn and vigilant to save--
  By night, attired so sightly and so smelly,
  With countenance as luminous as jelly,
Bobbing and bowing! King of hearts and knave
  Of diamonds, I'd bet a silver brick
  If brains were trumps you'd never take a trick.




EXPOSITOR VERITATIS


I Slept, and, waking in the years to be,
  Heard voices, and approaching whence they came,
Listened indifferently where a key
  Had lately been removed. An ancient dame
Said to her daughter: "Go to yonder caddy
And get some emery to scour your daddy."

And then I knew--some intuition said--
  That tombs were not and men had cleared their shelves
Of urns; and the electro-plated dead
  Stood pedestaled as statues of themselves.
With famous dead men all the public places
Were thronged, and some in piles awaited bases.

One mighty structure's high facade alone
Contained a single monumental niche,
Where, central in that steep expanse of stone,
Gleamed the familiar form of Thomas Fitch.
A man cried: "Lo! Truth's temple and its founder!"
Then gravely added: "I'm her chief expounder."




TO "COLONEL" DAN. BURNS


They say, my lord, that you're a Warwick. Well,
  The title's an absurd one, I believe:
You make no kings, you have no kings to sell,
  Though really 'twere easy to conceive
  You stuffing half-a-dozen up your sleeve.
No, you're no Warwick, skillful from the shell
To hatch out sovereigns. On a mare's nest, maybe,
You'd incubate a little jackass baby.

I fancy, too, that it is naught but stuff,
  This "power" that you're said to be "behind
The throne." I'm sure 'twere accurate enough
  To represent you simply as inclined
  To push poor Markham (ailing in his mind
And body, which were never very tough)
Round in an invalid's wheeled chair. Such menial
Employment to low natures is congenial.

No, Dan, you're an impostor every way:
  A human bubble, for "the earth," you know,
"Hath bubbles, as the water hath." Some day
  Some careless hand will prick your film, and O,
  How utterly you'll vanish! Daniel, throw
(As fallen Woolsey might to Cromwell say)
Your curst ambition to the pigs--though truly
'Twould make them greater pigs, and more unruly.




GEORGE A. KNIGHT


Attorney Knight, it happens so sometimes
That lawyers, justifying cut-throats' crimes
For hire--calumniating, too, for gold,
The dead, dumb victims cruelly unsouled--
Speak, through the press, to a tribunal far
More honorable than their Honors are,--
A court that sits not with assenting smile
While living rogues dead gentleman revile,--
A court where scoundrel ethics of your trade
Confuse no judgment and no cheating aid,--
The Court of Honest Souls, where you in vain
May plead your right to falsify for gain,
Sternly reminded if a man engage
To serve assassins for the liar's wage,
His mouth with vilifying falsehoods crammed,
He's twice detestable and doubly damned!

Attorney Knight, defending Powell, you,
To earn your fee, so energetic grew
(So like a hound, the pride of all the pack,
Clapping your nose upon the dead man's track
To run his faults to earth--at least proclaim
At vacant holes the overtaken game)
That men who marked you nourishing the tongue,
And saw your arms so vigorously swung,
All marveled how so light a breeze could stir
So great a windmill to so great a whirr!
Little they knew, or surely they had grinned,
The mill was laboring to raise the wind.

Ralph Smith a "shoulder-striker"! God, O hear
This hardy man's description of thy dear
Dead child, the gentlest soul, save only One,
E'er born in any land beneath the sun.
All silent benefactions still he wrought:
High deed and gracious speech and noble thought,
Kept all thy law, and, seeking still the right,
Upon his blameless breast received the light.

"Avenge, O Lord, thy slaughtered saints," he cried
Whose wrath was deep as his comparison wide--
Milton, thy servant. Nay, thy will be done:
To smite or spare--to me it all is one.
Can vengeance bring my sorrow to an end,
Or justice give me back my buried friend?
But if some Milton vainly now implore,
And Powell prosper as he did before,
Yet 'twere too much that, making no ado,
Thy saints be slaughtered and be slandered too.
So, Lord, make Knight his weapon keep in sheath,
Or do Thou wrest it from between his teeth!




UNARMED


Saint Peter sat at the jasper gate,
When Stephen M. White arrived in state.

"Admit me." "With pleasure," Peter said,
Pleased to observe that the man was dead;

"That's what I'm here for. Kindly show
Your ticket, my lord, and in you go."

White stared in blank surprise. Said he
"I _run_ this place--just turn that key."

"Yes?" said the Saint; and Stephen heard
With pain the inflection of that word.

But, mastering his emotion, he
Remarked: "My friend, you're too d---- free;

"I'm Stephen M., by thunder, White!"
And, "Yes?" the guardian said, with quite

The self-same irritating stress
Distinguishing his former yes.

And still demurely as a mouse
He twirled the key to that Upper House.

Then Stephen, seeing his bluster vain
Admittance to those halls to gain,

Said, neighborly: "Pray tell me. Pete,
Does any one contest my seat?"

The Saint replied: "Nay, nay, not so;
But you voted always wrong below:

"Whate'er the question, clear and high
You're voice rang: '_I_,' '_I_,' ever '_I_.'"

Now indignation fired the heart
Of that insulted immortal part.

"Die, wretch!" he cried, with blanching lip,
And made a motion to his hip,

With purpose murderous and hearty,
To draw the Democratic party!

He felt his fingers vainly slide
Upon his unappareled hide

(The dead arise from their "silent tents"
But not their late habiliments)

Then wailed--the briefest of his speeches:
"I've left it in my other breeches!"




A POLITICAL VIOLET


Come, Stanford, let us sit at ease
  And talk as old friends do.
You talk of anything you please,
  And I will talk of you.

You recently have said, I hear,
  That you would like to go
To serve as Senator. That's queer!
  Have you told William Stow?

Once when the Legislature said:
  "Go, Stanford, and be great!"
You lifted up your Jovian head
  And everlooked the State.

As one made leisurely awake,
  You lightly rubbed your eyes
And answered: "Thank you--please to make
  A note of my surprise.

"But who are they who skulk aside,
  As to get out of reach,
And in their clothing strive to hide
  Three thousand dollars each?

"Not members of your body, sure?
  No, that can hardly be:
All statesmen, I suppose, are pure.
  What! there are rogues? Dear me!"

You added, you'll recall, that though
  You were surprised and pained,
You thought, upon the whole, you'd go,
  And in that mind remained.

Now, what so great a change has wrought
  That you so frankly speak
Of "seeking" honors once unsought
  Because you "scorned to seek"?

Do you not fear the grave reproof
  In good Creed Haymond's eye?
Will Stephen Gage not stand aloof
  And pass you coldly by?

O, fear you not that Vrooman's lich
  Will rise from earth and point
At you a scornful finger which
  May lack, perchance, a joint?

Go, Stanford, where the violets grow,
  And join their modest train.
Await the work of William Stow
  And be surprised again.




THE SUBDUED EDITOR


Pope-choker Pixley sat in his den
    A-chewin' upon his quid.
He thought it was Leo Thirteen, and then
    He bit it intenser, he did.

The amber which overflew from the cud
    Like rivers which burst out of bounds--
'Twas peculiar grateful to think it blood
    A-gushin' from Papal wounds.

A knockin' was heard uponto the door
    Where some one a-waitin' was.
"Come in," said the shedder of priestly gore,
    Arrestin' to once his jaws.

The person which entered was curly of hair
    And smilin' as ever you see;
His eyes was blue, and uncommon fair
    Was his physiognomee.

And yet there was some'at remarkable grand--
    And the editor says as he looks:
"Your Height" (it was Highness, you understand,
    That he meant, but he spoke like books)--

"Your Height, I am in. I'm the editor man
    Of this paper--which is to say,
I'm the owner, too, and it's alway ran
    In the independentest way!

"Not a damgaloot can interfere,
    A-shapin' my course for me:
This paper's (and nothing can make it veer)
    Pixleian in policee!"

"It's little to me," said the sunny youth,
    "If journals is better or worse
Where I am to home they won't keep, in truth,
    The climate is that perverse.

"I've come, howsomever, your mind to light
    With a more superior fire:
You'll have naught hencefor'ard to do but write,
    While I sets by and inspire.

"We'll make it hot all round, bedad!"
    And his laughture was loud and free.
"The devil!" cried Pixley, surpassin' mad.
    "Exactly, my friend--that's me."

So he took a chair and a feather fan,
    And he sets and sets and sets,
Inspirin' that humbled editor man,
    Which sweats and sweats and sweats!

All unavailin' his struggles be,
    And it's, O, a weepin' sight
To see a great editor bold and free
    Reducted to sech a plight!




"BLACK BART, Po8"


Welcome, good friend; as you have served your term,
  And found the joy of crime to be a fiction,
I hope you'll hold your present faith, stand firm
  And not again be open to conviction.

Your sins, though scarlet once, are now as wool:
  You've made atonement for all past offenses,
And conjugated--'twas an awful pull!--
  The verb "to pay" in all its moods and tenses.

You were a dreadful criminal--by Heaven,
  I think there never was a man so sinful!
We've all a pinch or two of Satan's leaven,
  But you appeared to have an even skinful.

Earth shuddered with aversion at your name;
  Rivers fled backward, gravitation scorning;
The sea and sky, from thinking on your shame,
  Grew lobster-red at eve and in the morning.

But still red-handed at your horrid trade
  You wrought, to reason deaf, and to compassion.
But now with gods and men your peace is made
  I beg you to be good and in the fashion.

What's that?--you "ne'er again will rob a stage"?
  What! did you do so? Faith, I didn't know it.
Was _that_ what threw poor Themis in a rage?
  I thought you were convicted as a poet!

I own it was a comfort to my soul,
  And soothed it better than the deepest curses,
To think they'd got one poet in a hole
  Where, though he wrote, he could not print, his verses.

I thought that Welcker, Plunkett, Brooks, and all
  The ghastly crew who always are begriming
With villain couplets every page and wall,
  Might be arrested and "run in" for rhyming.

And then Parnassus would be left to me,
  And Pegasus should bear me up it gaily,
Nor down a steep place run into the sea,
  As now he must be tempted to do daily.

Well, grab the lyre-strings, hearties, and begin:
  Bawl your harsh souls all out upon the gravel.
I must endure you, for you'll never sin
  By robbing coaches, until dead men travel.




A "SCION OF NOBILITY"


Come, sisters, weep!--our Baron dear,
  Alas! has run away.
If always we had kept him here
  He had not gone astray.

Painter and grainer it were vain
  To say he was, before;
And if he were, yet ne'er again
  He'll darken here a door.

We mourn each matrimonial plan--
  Even tradesmen join the cry:
He was so promising a man
  Whenever he did buy.

He was a fascinating lad,
  Deny it all who may;
Even moneyed men confess he had
  A very taking way.

So from our tables he is gone--
  Our tears descend in showers;
We loved the very fat upon.
  His kidneys, for 'twas ours.

To women he was all respect
  To duns as cold as ice;
No lady could his suit reject,
  No tailor get its price.

He raised our hope above the sky;
  Alas! alack! and O!
That one who worked it up so high
  Should play it down so low!




THE NIGHT OF ELECTION


"O venerable patriot, I pray
Stand not here coatless; at the break of day
  We'll know the grand result--and even now
The eastern sky is faintly touched with gray.

"It ill befits thine age's hoary crown--
This rude environment of rogue and clown,
  Who, as the lying bulletins appear,
With drunken cries incarnadine the town.

"But if with noble zeal you stay to note
The outcome of your patriotic vote
  For Blaine, or Cleveland, and your native land,
Take--and God bless you!--take my overcoat."

"Done, pard--and mighty white of you. And now
  guess the country'll keep the trail somehow.
  I aint allowed to vote, the Warden said,
But whacked my coat up on old Stanislow."




THE CONVICTS' BALL


San Quentin was brilliant. Within the halls
Of the noble pile with the frowning walls
(God knows they've enough to make them frown,
With a Governor trying to break them down!)
Was a blaze of light. 'Twas the natal day
Of his nibs the popular John S. Gray,
And many observers considered his birth
The primary cause of his moral worth.
"The ball is free!" cried Black Bart, and they all
Said a ball with no chain was a novel ball;
"And I never have seed," said Jimmy Hope,
"Sech a lightsome dance withouten a rope."
Chinamen, Indians, Portuguese, Blacks,
Russians, Italians, Kanucks and Kanaks,
Chilenos, Peruvians, Mexicans--all
Greased with their presence that notable ball.
None were excluded excepting, perhaps,
The Rev. Morrison's churchly chaps,
Whom, to prevent a religious debate,
The Warden had banished outside of the gate.
The fiddler, fiddling his hardest the while,
"Called off" in the regular foot-hill style:
"Circle to the left!" and "Forward and back!"
And "Hellum to port for the stabbard tack!"
(This great _virtuoso_, it would appear,
Was Mate of the _Gatherer_ many a year.)
"_Ally man_ left!"--to a painful degree
His French was unlike to the French of Paree,
As heard from our countrymen lately abroad,
And his "_doe cee doe_" was the gem of the fraud.
But what can you hope from a gentleman barred
From circles of culture by dogs in the yard?
'Twas a glorious dance, though, all the same,
The Jardin Mabille in the days of its fame
Never saw legs perform such springs--
The cold-chisel's magic had given them wings.
They footed it featly, those lades and gents:
Dull care (said Long Moll) had a helly go-hence!

'Twas a very aristocratic affair:
The _creme de la creme_ and _elite_ were there--
Rank, beauty and wealth from the highest sets,
And Hubert Howe Bancroft sent his regrets.




A PRAYER


Sweet Spirit of Cesspool, hear a mother's prayer:
Her terrors pacify and offspring spare!
Upon Silurians alone let fall
(And God in Heaven have mercy on them all!)
The red revenges of your fragrant breath,
Hot with the flames invisible of death.
Sing in each nose a melody of smells,
And lead them snoutwise to their several hells!




TO ONE DETESTED


Sir, you're a veteran, revealed
  In history and fable
As warrior since you took the field,
    Defeating Abel.

As Commissary later (or
  If not, in every cottage
The tale is) you contracted for
    A mess of pottage.

In civil life you were, we read
  (And our respect increases)
A man of peace--a man, indeed,
    Of thirty pieces.

To paying taxes when you turned
  Your mind, or what you call so,
A wide celebrity you earned--
    Saphira also.

In every age, by various names,
  You've won renown in story,
But on your present record flames
    A greater glory.

Cain, Esau, and Iscariot, too,
  And Ananias, likewise,
Each had peculiar powers, but who
    Could lie as Mike lies?




THE BOSS'S CHOICE


Listen to his wild romances:
He advances foolish fancies,
Each expounded as his "view"--
                  Gu.

In his brain's opacous clot, ah
He has got a maggot! What a
Man with "views" to overwhelm us!--
           Gulielmus.

Hear his demagogic clamor--
Hear him stammer in his grammar!
Teaching, he will learn to spell--
      Gulielmus L.

Slave who paid the price demanded--
With two-handed iron branded
By the boss--pray cease to dose us,
Gulielmus L. Jocosus.




A MERCIFUL GOVERNOR


Standing within the triple wall of Hell,
  And flattening his nose against a grate
Behind whose brazen bars he'd had to dwell
  A thousand million ages to that date,
  Stoneman bewailed his melancholy fate,
And his big tear-drops, boiling as they fell,
Had worn between his feet, the record mentions,
A deep depression in the "good intentions."

Imperfectly by memory taught how--
  For prayer in Hell is a lost art--he prayed,
Uplifting his incinerated brow
  And flaming hands in supplication's aid.
"O grant," he cried, "my torment may be stayed--
In mercy, some short breathing spell allow!
If one good deed I did before my ghosting,
Spare me and give Delmas a double roasting."

Breathing a holy harmony in Hell,
  Down through the appalling clamors of the place,
Charming them all to willing concord, fell
  A Voice ineffable and full of grace:
"Because of all the law-defying race
One single malefactor of the cell
Thou didst not free from his incarceration,
Take thou ten thousand years of condonation."

Back from their fastenings began to shoot
  The rusted bolts; with dreadful roar, the gate
Laboriously turned; and, black with soot,
  The extinguished spirit passed that awful strait,
  And as he legged it into space, elate,
Muttered: "Yes, I remember that galoot--
I'd signed his pardon, ready to allot it,
But stuck it in my desk and quite forgot it."




AN INTERPRETATION


Now Lonergan appears upon the boards,
And Truth and Error sheathe their lingual swords.
No more in wordy warfare to engage,
The commentators bow before the stage,
And bookworms, militant for ages past,
Confess their equal foolishness at last,
Reread their Shakspeare in the newer light
And swear the meaning's obvious to sight.
For centuries the question has been hot:
Was Hamlet crazy, or was Hamlet not?
Now, Lonergan's illuminating art
Reveals the truth of the disputed "part,"
And shows to all the critics of the earth
That Hamlet was an idiot from birth!




A SOARING TOAD


So, Governor, you would not serve again
  Although we'd all agree to pay you double.
You find it all is vanity and pain--
  One clump of clover in a field of stubble--
  One grain of pleasure in a peck of trouble.
'Tis sad, at your age, having to complain
Of disillusion; but the fault is whose
When pigmies stumble, wearing giants' shoes?

I humbly told you many moons ago
  For high preferment you were all unfit.
A clumsy bear makes but a sorry show
  Climbing a pole. Let him, judicious, sit
  With dignity at bottom of his pit,
And none his awkwardness will ever know.
Some beasts look better, and feel better, too,
Seen from above; and so, I think, would you.

Why, you were mad! Did you suppose because
  Our foolish system suffers foolish men
To climb to power, make, enforce the laws,
  And, it is whispered, break them now and then,
  We love the fellows and respect them when
We've stilled the volume of our loud hurrahs?
When folly blooms we trample it the more
For having fertilized it heretofore.

Behold yon laborer! His garb is mean,
  His face is grimy, but who thinks to ask
The measure of his brains? 'Tis only seen
  He's fitted for his honorable task,
  And so delights the mind. But let him bask
In droll prosperity, absurdly clean--
Is that the man whom we admired before?
Good Lord, how ignorant, and what a bore!

Better for you that thoughtless men had said
  (Noting your fitness in the humbler sphere):
"Why don't they make him Governor?" instead
  Of, "Why the devil did they?" But I fear
  My words on your inhospitable ear
Are wasted like a sermon to the dead.
Still, they may profit you if studied well:
You can't be taught to think, but may to spell.




AN UNDRESS UNIFORM


The apparel does _not_ proclaim the man--
Polonius lied like a partisan,
And Salomon still would a hero seem
If (Heaven dispel the impossible dream!)
He stood in a shroud on the hangman's trap,
His eye burning holes in the black, black cap.
And the crowd below would exclaim amain:
"He's ready to fall for his country again!"




THE PERVERTED VILLAGE

AFTER GOLDSMITH


Sweet Auburn! liveliest village of the plain,
Where Health and Slander welcome every train,
Whence smiling innocence, its tribute paid,
Retires in terror, wounded and dismayed--
Dear lovely bowers of gossip and disease,
Whose climate cures us that thy dames may tease,
How often have I knelt upon thy green
And prayed for death, to mitigate their spleen!
How often have I paused on every charm
With mingled admiration and alarm--
The brook that runs by many a scandal-mill,
The church whose pastor groans upon the grill,
The cowthorn bush with seats beneath the shade,
Where hearts are struck and reputations flayed;
How often wished thine idle wives, some day,
Might more at whist, less at the devil, play.

Unblest retirement! ere my life's decline
(Killed by detraction) may I witness thine.
How happy she who, shunning shades like these,
Finds in a wolf-den greater peace and ease;
Who quits the place whence truth did earlier fly,
And rather than come back prefers to die!
For her no jealous maids renounce their sleep,
Contriving malices to make her weep;
No iron-faced dames her character debate
And spurn imploring mercy from the gate;
But down she lies to a more peaceful end,
For wolves do not calumniate, but rend--
Sinks piecemeal to their maws, a willing prey,
While resignation lubricates the way,
And all her prospects brighten at the last:
To wolves, not women, an approved repast.

_1884_.




MR. SHEETS


The Devil stood before the gate
Of Heaven. He had a single mate:
Behind him, in his shadow, slunk
Clay Sheets in a perspiring funk.
"Saint Peter, see this season ticket,"
Said Satan; "pray undo the wicket."
The sleepy Saint threw slight regard
Upon the proffered bit of card,
Signed by some clerical dead-beats:
"Admit the bearer and Clay Sheets."
Peter expanded all his eyes:
"'Clay Sheets?'--well, I'll be damned!" he cries.
"Our couches are of golden cloud;
Nothing of earth is here allowed.
I'll let you in," he added, shedding
On Nick a smile--"but not your bedding."




A JACK-AT-ALL-VIEWS


So, Estee, you are still alive! I thought
  That you had died and were a blessed ghost
I know at least your coffin once was bought
  With Railroad money; and 'twas said by most
  Historians that Stanford made a boast
The seller "threw you in." That goes for naught--
Man takes delight in fancy's fine inventions,
And woman too, 'tis said, if they are French ones.

Do you remember, Estee--ah, 'twas long
  And long ago!--how fierce you grew and hot
When anything impeded the straight, strong,
  Wild sweep of the great billow you had got
  Atop of, like a swimmer bold? Great Scott!
How fine your wavemanship! How loud your song
Of "Down with railroads!" When the wave subsided
And left you stranded you were much divided.

Then for a time you were content to wade
  The waters of the "robber barons'" moat.
To fetch, and carry was your humble trade,
  And ferry Stanford over in a boat,
  Well paid if he bestowed the kindly groat
And spoke you fair and called you pretty maid.
And when his stomach seemed a bit unsteady
You got your serviceable basin ready.

Strange man! how odd to see you, smug and spruce,
  There at Chicago, burrowed in a Chair,
Not made to measure and a deal too loose,
  And see you lift your little arm and swear
  Democracy shall be no more! If it's a fair
And civil question, and not too abstruse,
Were you elected as a "robber baron,"
Or as a Communist whose teeth had hair on?




MY LORD POET


"Who drives fat oxen should himself be fat;"
  Who sings for nobles, he should noble be.
There's no _non sequitur_, I think, in that,
  And this is logic plain as a, b, c.
Now, Hector Stuart, you're a Scottish prince,
  If right you fathom your descent--that fall
From grace; and since you have no peers, and since
  You have no kind of nobleness at all,
'Twere better to sing little, lest you wince
  When made by heartless critics to sing small.
And yet, my liege, I bid you not despair--
  Ambition conquers but a realm at once:
For European bays arrange your hair--
  Two continents, in time, shall crown you Dunce!




TO THE FOOL-KILLER


Ah, welcome, welcome! Sit you down, old friend;
Your pipe I'll serve, your bottle I'll attend.
'Tis many a year since you and I have known
Society more pleasant than our own
In our brief respites from excessive work--
I pointing out the hearts for you to dirk.
What have you done since lately at this board
We canvassed the deserts of all the horde
And chose what names would please the people best,
Engraved on coffin-plates--what bounding breast
Would give more satisfaction if at rest?
But never mind--the record cannot fail:
The loftiest monuments will tell the tale.

I trust ere next we meet you'll slay the chap
Who calls old Tyler "Judge" and Merry "Cap"--
Calls John P. Irish "Colonel" and John P.,
Whose surname Jack-son speaks his pedigree,
By the same title--men of equal rank
Though one is belly all, and one all shank,
Showing their several service in the fray:
One fought for food and one to get away.
I hope, I say, you'll kill the "title" man
Who saddles one on every back he can,
Then rides it from Beersheba to Dan!
Another fool, I trust, you will perform
Your office on while my resentment's warm:
He shakes my hand a dozen times a day
If, luckless, I so often cross his way,
Though I've three senses besides that of touch,
To make me conscious of a fool too much.
Seek him, friend Killer, and your purpose make
Apparent as his guilty hand you take,
And set him trembling with a solemn: "Shake!"

But chief of all the addle-witted crew
Conceded by the Hangman's League to you,
The fool (his dam's acquainted with a knave)
Whose fluent pen, of his no-brain the slave,
Strews notes of introduction o'er the land
And calls it hospitality--his hand
May palsy seize ere he again consign
To me his friend, as I to Hades mine!
Pity the wretch, his faults howe'er you see,
Whom A accredits to his victim, B.
Like shuttlecock which battledores attack
(One speeds it forward, one would drive it back)
The trustful simpleton is twice unblest--
A rare good riddance, an unwelcome guest.
The glad consignor rubs his hands to think
How duty is commuted into ink;
The consignee (his hands he cannot rub--
He has the man upon them) mutters: "Cub!"
And straightway plans to lose him at the Club.
You know, good Killer, where this dunce abides--
The secret jungle where he writes and hides--
Though no exploring foot has e'er upstirred
His human elephant's exhaustless herd.
Go, bring his blood! We'll drink it--letting fall
A due libation to the gods of Gall.
On second thought, the gods may have it all.




ONE AND ONE ARE TWO


The trumpet sounded and the dead
  Came forth from earth and ocean,
And Pickering arose and sped
  Aloft with wobbling motion.

"What makes him fly lop-sided?" cried
  A soul of the elected.
"One ear was wax," a rogue replied,
  "And isn't resurrected."

Below him on the pitted plain,
  By his abandoned hollow,
His hair and teeth tried all in vain
  The rest of him to follow.

Saint Peter, seeing him ascend,
  Came forward to the wicket,
And said: "My mutilated friend,
  I'll thank you for your ticket."

"The _Call_," said Pickering, his hand
  To reach the latch extended.
Said Peter, affable and bland:
  "The free-list is suspended--

"What claim have you that's valid here?"
  That ancient vilifier
Reflected; then, with look austere,
  Replied: "I am a liar."

Said Peter: "That is simple, neat
  And candid Anglo-Saxon,
But--well, come in, and take a seat
  Up there by Colonel Jackson."




MONTAGUE LEVERSON


As some enormous violet that towers
Colossal o'er the heads of lowlier flowers--
Its giant petals royally displayed,
And casting half the landscape into shade;
Delivering its odors, like the blows
Of some strong slugger, at the public nose;
Pride of two Nations--for a single State
Would scarce suffice to sprout a plant so great;
So Leverson's humility, outgrown
The meaner virtues that he deigns to own,
To the high skies its great corolla rears,
O'ertopping all he has except his ears.




THE WOFUL TALE OF MR. PETERS


I should like, good friends, to mention the disaster which befell
Mr. William Perry Peters, of the town of Muscatel,
Whose fate is full of meaning, if correctly understood--
Admonition to the haughty, consolation to the good.

It happened in the hot snap which we recently incurred,
When 'twas warm enough to carbonize the feathers of a bird,
And men exclaimed: "By Hunky!" who were bad enough to swear,
And pious persons supervised their adjectives with care.

Mr. Peters was a pedagogue of honor and repute,
His learning comprehensive, multifarious, minute.
It was commonly conceded in the section whence he came
That the man who played against him needed knowledge of the game.

And some there were who whispered, in the town of Muscatel,
That besides the game of Draw he knew Orthography as well;
Though, the school directors, frigidly contemning that as stuff,
Thought that Draw (and maybe Spelling, if it pleased him) was enough.

Withal, he was a haughty man--indubitably great,
But too vain of his attainments and his power in debate.
His mien was contumelious to men of lesser gift:
"It's only _me_," he said, "can give the human mind a lift.

"Before a proper audience, if ever I've a chance,
You'll see me chipping in, the cause of Learning to advance.
Just let me have a decent chance to back my mental hand
And I'll come to center lightly in a way they'll understand."

Such was William Perry Peters, and I feel a poignant sense
Of grief that I'm unable to employ the present tense;
But Providence disposes, be our scheming what it may,
And disposed of Mr. Peters in a cold, regardless way.

It occurred in San Francisco, whither Mr. Peters came
In the cause of Education, feeling still the holy flame
Of ambition to assist in lifting up the human mind
To a higher plane of knowledge than its Architect designed.

He attended the convention of the pedagogic host;
He was first in the Pavilion, he was last to leave his post.
For days and days he narrowly observed the Chairman's eye,
His efforts ineffectual to catch it on the fly.

The blessed moment came at last: the Chairman tipped his head.
"The gentleman from ah--um--er," that functionary said.
The gentleman from ah--um--er reflected with a grin:
"They'll know me better by-and-by, when I'm a-chipping in."

So William Perry Peters mounted cheerfully his feet--
And straightway was aglow with an incalculable heat!
His face was as effulgent as a human face could be,
And caloric emanated from his whole periphery;

For he felt himself the focus of non-Muscatelish eyes,
And the pain of their convergence was a terror and surprise.
As with pitiless impaction all their heat-waves on him broke
He was seen to be evolving awful quantities of smoke!

"Put him out!" cried all in chorus; but the meaning wasn't clear
Of that succoring suggestion to his obfuscated ear;
And it notably augmented his incinerating glow
To regard himself excessive, or in any way _de trop_.

Gone was all his wild ambition to lift up the human mind!--
Gone the words he would have uttered!--gone the thought that lay behind!
For "words that burn" may be consumed in a superior flame,
And "thoughts that breathe" may breathe their last, and die a death of shame.

He'd known himself a shining light, but never had he known
Himself so very luminous as now he knew he shone.
"A pillar, I, of fire," he'd said, "to guide my race will be;"
And now that very inconvenient thing to him was he.

He stood there all irresolute; the seconds went and came;
The minutes passed and did but add fresh fuel to his flame.
How long he stood he knew not--'twas a century or more--
And then that incandescent man levanted for the door!

He darted like a comet from the building to the street,
Where Fahrenheit attested ninety-five degrees of heat.
Vicissitudes of climate make the tenure of the breath
Precarious, and William Perry Peters froze to death!




TWIN UNWORTHIES


Ye parasites that to the rich men stick,
As to the fattest sheep the thrifty tick--
Ed'ard to Stanford and to Crocker Ben
(To Ben and Ed'ard many meaner men,
And lice to these)--who do the kind of work
That thieves would have the honesty to shirk--
Whose wages are that your employers own
The fat that reeks upon your every bone
And deigns to ask (the flattery how sweet!)
About its health and how it stands the heat,--
Hail and farewell! I meant to write about you,
But, no, my page is cleaner far without you.




ANOTHER PLAN


Editor Owen, of San Jose,
Commonly known as "our friend J.J."
Weary of scribbling for daily bread,
Weary of writing what nobody read,
Slept one day at his desk and dreamed
That an angel before him stood and beamed
With compassionate eyes upon him there.

Editor Owen is not so fair
In feature, expression, form or limb
But glances like that are familiar to him;
And so, to arrive by the shortest route
At his visitor's will he said, simply: "Toot."
"Editor Owen," the angel said,
"Scribble no more for your daily bread.
Your intellect staggers and falls and bleeds,
Weary of writing what nobody reads.
Eschew now the quill--in the coming years
Homilize man through his idle ears.
Go lecture!" "Just what I intended to do,"
Said Owen. The angel looked pained and flew.

Editor Owen, of San Jose,
Commonly known as "our friend J.J."
Scribbling no more to supply his needs,
Weary of writing what nobody reads,
Passes of life each golden year
Speaking what nobody comes to hear.




A POLITICAL APOSTATE


Good friend, it is with deep regret I note
The latest, strangest turning of your coat;
Though any way you wear that mental clout
The seamy side seems always to be out.
Who could have thought that you would e'er sustain
The Southern shotgun's arbitrary reign!--
Your sturdy hand assisting to replace
The broken yoke on a delivered race;
The ballot's purity no more your care,
With equal privilege to dark and fair.
To Yesterday a traitor, to To-day
You're constant but the better to betray
To-morrow. Your convictions all are naught
But the wild asses of the world of thought,
Which, flying mindless o'er the barren plain,
Perceive at last they've nothing so to gain,
And, turning penitent upon their track,
Economize their strength by flying back.

Ex-champion of Freedom, battle-lunged,
No more, red-handed, or at least red-tongued,
Brandish the javelin which by others thrown
Clove Sambo's heart to quiver in your own!
Confess no more that when his blood was shed,
And you so sympathetically bled,
The bow that spanned the mutual cascade
Was but the promise of a roaring trade
In offices. Your fingering now the trigger
Shows that you _knew_ your Negro was a nigger!
_Ad hominem_ this _argumentum_ runs:
Peace!--let us fire another kind of guns.

I grant you, friend, that it is very true
The Blacks are ignorant--and sable, too.
What then? One way of two a fool must vote,
And either way with gentlemen of note
Whose villain feuds the fact attest too well
That pedagogues nor vice nor error quell.
The fiercest controversies ever rage
When Miltons and Salmasii engage.
No project wide attention ever drew
But it disparted all the learned crew.
As through their group the cleaving line's prolonged
With fiery combatants each field is thronged.
In battle-royal they engage at once
For guidance of the hesitating dunce.
The Titans on the heights contend full soon--
On this side Webster and on that Calhoun,
The monstrous conflagration of their fight
Startling the day and splendoring the night!
Both are unconquerable--_one_ is right.
Will't keep the pigmy, if we make him strong,
From siding with a giant in the wrong?
When Genius strikes for error, who's afraid
To arm poor Folly with a wooden blade?
O Rabelais, you knew it all!--your good
And honest judge (by men misunderstood)
Knew to be right there was but one device
Less fallible than ignorance--the dice.
The time must come--Heaven expedite the day!--
When all mankind shall their decrees obey,
And nations prosper in their peaceful sway.




TINKER DICK


Good Parson Dickson preached, I'm told,
A sermon--ah, 'twas very old
  And very, very, bald!
'Twas all about--I know not what
It was about, nor what 'twas not.
  "A Screw Loose" it was called.

Whatever, Parson Dick, you say,
The world will get each blessed day
  Still more and more askew,
And fall apart at last. Great snakes!
What skillful tinker ever takes
  His tongue to turn a screw?




BATS IN SUNSHINE


Well, Mr. Kemble, you are called, I think,
  A great divine, and I'm a great profane.
You as a Congregationalist blink
  Some certain truths that I esteem a gain,
  And drop them in the coffers of my brain,
Pleased with the pretty music of their chink.
Perhaps your spiritual wealth is such
A golden truth or two don't count for much.

You say that you've no patience with such stuff
  As by Renan is writ, and when you read
(Why _do_ you read?) have hardly strength enough
  To hold your hand from flinging the vile screed
  Into the fire. That were a wasteful deed
Which you'd repent in sackcloth extra rough;
For books cost money, and I'm told you care
To lay up treasures Here as well as There.

I fear, good, pious soul, that you mistake
  Your thrift for toleration. Never mind:
Renan in any case would hardly break
  His great, strong, charitable heart to find
  The bats and owls of your myopic kind
Pained by the light that his ideas make.
'Tis Truth's best purpose to shine in at holes
Where cower the Kembles, to confound their souls!




A WORD TO THE UNWISE

    [Charles Main, of the firm of Main & Winchester, has ordered a
    grand mausoleum for his plot in Mountain View Cemetery.--_City
    Newspaper_.]


Charles Main, of Main & Winchester, attend
With friendly ear the chit-chat of a friend
  Who knows you not, yet knows that you and he
Travel two roads that have a common end.

We journey forward through the time allowed,
I humbly bending, you erect and proud.
  Our heads alike will stable soon the worm--
The one that's lifted, and the one that's bowed.

You in your mausoleum shall repose,
I where it pleases Him who sleep bestows;
  What matter whether one so little worth
Shall stain the marble or shall feed the rose?

Charles Main, I had a friend who died one day.
A metal casket held his honored clay.
  Of cyclopean architecture stood
The splendid vault where he was laid away.

A dozen years, and lo! the roots of grass
Had burst asunder all the joints; the brass,
  The gilded ornaments, the carven stones
Lay tumbled all together in a mass.

A dozen years! That taxes your belief.
Make it a thousand if the time's too brief.
  'Twill be the same to you; when you are dead
You cannot even count your days of grief.

Suppose a pompous monument you raise
Till on its peak the solar splendor blaze
  While yet about its base the night is black;
But will it give your glory length of days?

Say, when beneath your rubbish has been thrown,
Some rogue to reputation all unknown--
  Men's backs being turned--should lift his thieving hand,
Efface your name and substitute his own.

Whose then would be the monument? To whom
Would be the fame? Forgotten in your gloom,
  Your very name forgotten--ah, my friend,
The name is all that's rescued by the tomb.

For memory of worth and work we go
To other records than a stone can show.
  These lacking, naught remains; with these
The stone is needless for the world will know.

Then build your mausoleum if you must,
And creep into it with a perfect trust;
  But in the twinkling of an eye the plow
Shall pass without obstruction through your dust.

Another movement of the pendulum,
And, lo! the desert-haunting wolf shall come,
  And, seated on the spot, shall howl by night
O'er rotting cities, desolate and dumb.




ON THE PLATFORM


When Dr. Bill Bartlett stepped out of the hum
  Of Mammon's distracting and wearisome strife
To stand and deliver a lecture on "Some
  Conditions of Intellectual Life,"
I cursed the offender who gave him the hall
To lecture on any conditions at all!

But he rose with a fire divine in his eye,
  Haranguing with endless abundance of breath,
Till I slept; and I dreamed of a gibbet reared high,
  And Dr. Bill Bartlett was dressing for death.
And I thought in my dream: "These conditions, no doubt,
Are bad for the life he was talking about."

So I cried (pray remember this all was a dream):
  "Get off of the platform!--it isn't the kind!"
But he fell through the trap, with a jerk at the beam,
  And wiggled his toes to unburden his mind.
And, O, so bewitching the thoughts he advanced,
That I clung to his ankles, attentive, entranced!




A DAMPENED ARDOR


The Chinatown at Bakersfield
  Was blazing bright and high;
The flames to water would not yield,
  Though torrents drenched the sky
And drowned the ground for miles around--
  The houses were so dry.

Then rose an aged preacher man
  Whom all did much admire,
Who said: "To force on you my plan
  I truly don't aspire,
But streams, it seems, might quench these beams
  If turned upon the fire."

The fireman said: "This hoary wight
  His folly dares to thrust
On _us_! 'Twere well he felt our might--
  Nay, he shall feel our must!"
With jet of wet and small regret
  They laid that old man's dust.




ADAIR WELCKER, POET


The Swan of Avon died--the Swan
Of Sacramento'll soon be gone;
And when his death-song he shall coo,
Stand back, or it will kill you too.




TO A WORD-WARRIOR


Frank Pixley, you, who kiss the hand
  That strove to cut the country's throat,
  Cannot forgive the hands that smote
Applauding in a distant land,--

Applauding carelessly, as one
  The weaker willing to befriend
  Until the quarrel's at an end,
Then learn by whom it was begun.

When North was pitted against South
  Non-combatants on either side
  In calculating fury vied,
And fought their foes by word of mouth.

That devil's-camisade you led
  With formidable feats of tongue.
  Upon the battle's rear you hung--
With Samson's weapon slew the dead!

So hot the ardor of your soul
  That every fierce civilian came,
  His torch to kindle at your name,
Or have you blow his cooling coal.

Men prematurely left their beds
  And sought the gelid bath--so great
  The heat and splendor of your hate
Of Englishmen and "Copperheads."

King Liar of deceitful men,
  For imposition doubly armed!
  The patriots whom your speaking charmed
You stung to madness with your pen.

There was a certain journal here,
  Its English owner growing rich--
  Your hand the treason wrote for which
A mob cut short its curst career.

If, Pixley, you had not the brain
  To know the true from false, or you
  To Truth had courage to be true,
And loyal to her perfect reign;

If you had not your powers arrayed
  To serve the wrong by tricksy speech,
  Nor pushed yourself within the reach
Of retribution's accolade,

I had not had the will to go
  Outside the olive-bordered path
  Of peace to cut the birch of wrath,
And strip your body for the blow.

Behold how dark the war-clouds rise
  About the mother of our race!
  The lightnings gild her tranquil face
And glitter in her patient eyes.

Her children throng the hither flood
  And lean intent above the beach.
  Their beating hearts inhibit speech
With stifling tides of English blood.

"Their skies, but not their hearts, they change
  Who go in ships across the sea"--
  Through all centuries to be
The strange new land will still be strange.

The Island Mother holds in gage
  The souls of sons she never saw;
  Superior to law, the law
Of sympathetic heritage.

Forgotten now the foolish reign
  Of wrath which sundered trivial ties.
  A soldier's sabre vainly tries
To cleave a spiritual chain.

The iron in our blood affines,
  Though fratricidal hands may spill.
  Shall Hate be throned on Bunker Hill,
Yet Love abide at Seven Pines?




A CULINARY CANDIDATE


A cook adorned with paper cap,
  Or waiter with a tray,
May be a worthy kind of chap
      In his way,
But when we want one for Recorder,
Then, Mr. Walton, take our order.




THE OLEOMARGARINE MAN


Once--in the county of Marin,
Where milk is sold to purchase gin--
Renowned for butter and renowned
For fourteen ounces to the pound--
A bull stood watching every turn
Of Mr. Wilson with a churn,
As that deigning worthy stalked
About him, eying as he walked,
El Toro's sleek and silken hide,
His neck, his flank and all beside;
Thinking with secret joy: "I'll spread
That mammal on a slice of bread!"

Soon Mr. Wilson's keen concern
To get the creature in his churn
Unhorsed his caution--made him blind
To the fell vigor of bullkind,
Till, filled with valor to the teeth,
He drew his dasher from its sheath
And bravely brandished it; the while
He smiled a dark, portentous smile;
A deep, sepulchral smile; a wide
And open smile, which, at his side,
The churn to copy vainly tried;
A smile so like the dawn of doom
That all the field was palled in gloom,
And all the trees within a mile,
As tribute to that awful smile,
Made haste, with loyalty discreet,
To fling their shadows at his feet.
Then rose his battle-cry: "I'll spread
That mammal on a slice of bread!"

To such a night the day had turned
That Taurus dimly was discerned.
He wore so meek and grave an air
It seemed as if, engaged in prayer
This thunderbolt incarnate had
No thought of anything that's bad:
This concentrated earthquake stood
And gave his mind to being good.
Lightly and low he drew his breath--
This magazine of sudden death!
All this the thrifty Wilson's glance
Took in, and, crying, "Now's my chance!"
Upon the bull he sprang amain
To put him in his churn. Again
Rang out his battle-yell: "I'll spread
That mammal on a slice of bread!"

Sing, Muse, that battle-royal--sing
The deeds that made the region ring,
The blows, the bellowing, the cries,
The dust that darkened all the skies,
The thunders of the contest, all--
Nay, none of these things did befall.
A yell there was--a rush--no more:
El Toro, tranquil as before,
Still stood there basking in the sun,
Nor of his legs had shifted one--
Stood there and conjured up his cud
And meekly munched it. Scenes of blood
Had little charm for him. His head
He merely nodded as he said:
"I've spread that butterman upon
A slice of Southern Oregon."




GENESIS


God said, "Let there be Crime," and the command
Brought Satan, leading Stoneman by the hand.
"Why, that's Stupidity, not Crime," said God--
"Bring what I ordered." Satan with a nod
Replied, "This is _one_ element--when I
The _other_--Opportunity--supply
In just equivalent, the two'll affine
And in a chemical embrace combine
And Crime result--for Crime can only be
Stupiditate of Opportunity."
So leaving Stoneman (not as yet endowed
With soul) in special session on a cloud,
Nick to his sooty laboratory went,
Returning soon with t'other element.
"Here's Opportunity," he said, and put
Pen, ink, and paper down at Stoneman's foot.
He seized them--Heaven was filled with fires and thunders,
And Crime was added to Creation's wonders!




LLEWELLEN POWELL


Villain, when the word is spoken,
And your chains at last are broken
  When the gibbet's chilling shade
Ceases darkly to enfold you,
And the angel who enrolled you
  As a master of the trade
Of assassination sadly
  Blots the record he has made,
And your name and title paints
In the calendar of saints;
When the devils, dancing madly
In the midmost Hell, are very
Multitudinously merry--
Then beware, beware, beware!---
Nemesis is everywhere!
You shall hear her at your back,
  And, your hunted visage turning,
  Fancy that her eyes are burning
Like a tiger's on your track!
You shall hear her in the breeze
Whispering to summer trees.
You shall hear her calling, calling
  To your spirit through the storm
  When the giant billows form
And the splintered lightning, falling
Down the heights of Heaven, appalling,
Splendors all the tossing seas!
On your bed at night reclining,
Stars into your chamber shining
  As they roll around the Pole,
None their purposes divining,
  Shall appear to search your soul,
And to gild the mark of Cain
That burns into your tortured brain!
And the dead man's eyes shall ever
  Meet your own wherever you,
  Desperate, shall turn you to,
And you shall escape them never!

By your heritage of guilt;
By the blood that you have spilt;
By the Law that you have broken;
By the terrible red token
  That you bear upon your brow;
By the awful sentence spoken
  And irrevocable vow
Which consigns you to a living
Death and to the unforgiving
Furies who avenge your crime
Through the periods of time;
By that dread eternal doom
Hinted in your future's gloom,
  As the flames infernal tell
Of their power and perfection
In their wavering reflection
  On the battlements of Hell;
By the mercy you denied,
  I condemn your guilty soul
In your body to abide,
  Like a serpent in a hole!




THE SUNSET GUN.


Off Santa Cruz the western wave
  Was crimson as with blood:
The sun was sinking to his grave
  Beneath that angry flood.

Sir Walter Turnbull, brave and stout,
  Then shouted, "Ho! lads; run--
The powder and the ball bring out
  To fire the sunset gun.

"That punctual orb did ne'er omit
  To keep, by land or sea,
Its every engagement; it
  Shall never wait for me."

Behold the black-mouthed cannon stand,
  Ready with charge and prime,
The lanyard in the gunner's hand.
  Sir Walter waits the time.

The glowing orb sinks in the sea,
  And clouds of steam aspire,
Then fade, and the horizon's free.
  Sir Walter thunders: "Fire!"

The gunner pulls--the lanyard parts
  And not a sound ensues.
The beating of ten thousand hearts
  Was heard at Santa Cruz!

Off Santa Cruz the western wave
  Was crimson as with blood;
The sun, with visage stern and grave,
  Came back from out the flood.




THE "VIDUATE DAME"


'Tis the widow of Thomas Blythe,
  And she goeth upon the spree,
And red are cheeks of the bystanders
  For her acts are light and free.

In a seven-ounce costume
  The widow of Thomas Blythe,
Y-perched high on the window ledge,
  The difficult can-can tryeth.

Ten constables they essay
  To bate the dame's halloing.
With the widow of Thomas Blythe
  Their hands are overflowing,

And they cry: "Call the National Guard
  To quell this parlous muss--
For all of the widows of Thomas Blythe
  Are upon the spree and us!"

O long shall the eerie tale be told
  By that posse's surviving tithe;
And with tears bedewed he'll sing this rude
  Ballad of the widow of Thomas Blythe.




FOUR OF A KIND


ROBERT F. MORROW

Dear man! although a stranger and a foe
To soft affection's humanizing glow;
Although untaught how manly hearts may throb
With more desires than the desire to rob;
Although as void of tenderness as wit,
And owning nothing soft but Maurice Schmitt;
Although polluted, shunned and in disgrace,
You fill me with a passion to embrace!
Attentive to your look, your smile, your beck,
I watch and wait to fall upon your neck.
Lord of my love, and idol of my hope,
You are my Valentine, and I'm
                                         A ROPE.


ALFRED CLARKE JR.

Illustrious son of an illustrious sire--
Entrusted with the duty to cry "Fire!"
And call the engines out, exert your power
With care. When, looking from your lofty tower,
You see a ruddy light on every wall,
Pause for a moment ere you sound the call:
It may be from a fire, it may be, too,
From good men's blushes when they think of you.


JUDGE RUTLEDGE

Sultan of Stupids! with enough of brains
To go indoors in all uncommon rains,
But not enough to stay there when the storm
Is past. When all the world is dry and warm,
In irking comfort, lamentably gay,
Keeping the evil tenor of your way,
You walk abroad, sweet, beautiful and smug,
And Justice hears you with her wonted shrug,
Lifts her broad bandage half-an-inch and keeps
One eye upon you while the other weeps.


W.H.L. BARNES

Happy the man who sin's proverbial wage
Receives on the instalment plan--in age.
For him the bulldog pistol's honest bark
Has naught of terror in its blunt remark.
He looks with calmness on the gleaming steel--
If e'er it touched his heart he did not feel:
Superior hardness turned its point away,
Though urged by fond affinity to stay;
His bloodless veins ignored the futile stroke,
And moral mildew kept the cut in cloak.
Happy the man, I say, to whom the wage
Of sin has been commuted into age.
Yet not _quite_ happy--hark, that horrid cry!--
His cruel mirror wounds him in the eye!




RECONCILIATION


Stanford and Huntington, so long at outs,
Kissed and made up. If you have any doubts
Dismiss them, for I saw them do it, man;
And then--why, then I clutched my purse and ran.




A VISION OF CLIMATE


I dreamed that I was poor and sick and sad,
  Broken in hope and weary of my life;
My ventures all miscarrying--naught had
  For all my labor in the heat and strife.
  And in my heart some certain thoughts were rife
Of an unsummoned exit. As I lay
  Considering my bitter state, I cried:
"Alas! that hither I did ever stray.
  Better in some fair country to have died
Than live in such a land, where Fortune never
(Unless he be successful) crowns Endeavor."

Then, even as I lamented, lo! there came
  A troop of Presences--I knew not whence
Nor what they were: thought cannot rightly name
  What's known through spiritual evidence,
  Reported not by gross material sense.
"Why come ye here?" I seemed to cry (though naught
  My sleeping tongue did utter) to the first--
"What are ye?--with what woful message fraught?
  Ye have a ghastly look, as ye had burst
Some sepulcher in memory. Weird creatures,
I'm sure I'd know you if ye had but features."

Some subtle organ noted the reply
  (Inaudible to ear of flesh the tone):
"The Finest Climate in the World am I,
  From Siskiyou to San Diego known--
  From the Sierra to the sea. The zone
Called semi-tropical I've pulled about
  And placed it where it does most good, I trust.
I shake my never-failing bounty out
  Alike upon the just and the unjust."
"That's very true," said I, "but when 'tis shaken
My share by the unjust is ever taken."

"Permit me," it resumed, "now to present
  My eldest son, the Champagne Atmosphere,
And others to rebuke your discontent--
  The Mammoth Squash, Strawberry All the Year,
  The fair No Lightning--flashing only here--
The Wholesome Earthquake and Italian Sky,
  With its Unstriking Sun; and last, not least,
The Compos Mentis Dog. Now, ingrate, try
  To bring a better stomach to the feast:
When Nature makes a dance and pays the piper,
  To be unhappy is to be a viper!"

"Why, yet," said I, "with all your blessings fine
  (And Heaven forbid that I should speak them ill)
I yet am poor and sick and sad. Ye shine
  With more of splendor than of heat: for still,
  Although my will is warm, my bones are chill."
"Then warm you with enthusiasm's blaze--
  Fortune waits not on toil," they cried; "O then
Join the wild chorus clamoring our praise--
  Throw up your beaver and throw down you pen!"
"Begone!" I shouted. They bewent, a-smirking,
  And I, awakening, fell straight a-working.




A "MASS" MEETING


It was a solemn rite as e'er
  Was seen by mortal man.
The celebrants, the people there,
  Were all Republican.

There Estee bent his grizzled head,
  And General Dimond, too,
And one--'twas Reddick, some one said,
  Though no one clearly knew.

I saw the priest, white-robed and tall
  (Assistant, Father Stow)--
He was the pious man men call
  Dan Burns of Mexico.

Ah, 'twas a high and holy rite
  As any one could swear.
"What does it mean?" I asked a wight
  Who knelt apart in prayer.

"A mass for the repose," he said,
  "Of Colonel Markham's"----"What,
Is gallant Colonel Markham dead?
  'Tis sad, 'tis sad, God wot!"

"A mass"--repeated he, and rose
  To go and kneel among
The worshipers--"for the repose
  Of Colonel Markham's tongue."




FOR PRESIDENT, LELAND STANFORD


Mahomet Stanford, with covetous stare,
Gazed on a vision surpassingly fair:
Far on the desert's remote extreme
A mountain of gold with a mellow gleam
Reared its high pinnacles into the sky,
The work of _mirage_ to delude the eye.
Pixley Pasha, at the Prophet's feet
Piously licking them, swearing them sweet,
Ventured, observing his master's glance,
To beg that he order the mountain's advance.
Mahomet Stanford exerted his will,
Commanding: "In Allah's name, hither, hill!"
Never an inch the mountain came.
Mahomet Stanford, with face aflame,
Lifted his foot and kicked, alack!
Pixley Pasha on the end of the back.
Mollified thus and smiling free,
He said: "Since the mountain won't come to me,
I'll go to the mountain." With infinite pains,
Camels in caravans, negroes in trains,
Warriors, workmen, women, and fools,
Food and water and mining tools
He gathered about him, a mighty array,
And the journey began at the close of day.
All night they traveled--at early dawn
Many a wearisome league had gone.
Morning broke fair with a golden sheen,
Mountain, alas, was nowhere seen!
Mahomet Stanford pounded his breast,
Pixley Pasha he thus addressed:
"Dog of mendacity, cheat and slave,
May jackasses sing o'er your grandfather's grave!"




FOR MAYOR


O Abner Doble--whose "catarrhal name"
  Budd of that ilk might envy--'tis a rough
  Rude thing to say, but it is plain enough
Your name is to be sneezed at: its acclaim
Will "fill the speaking trump of future fame"
  With an impeded utterance--a puff
  Suggesting that a pinch or two of snuff
Would clear the tube and somewhat disinflame.
Nay, Abner Doble, you'll not get from me
  My voice and influence: I'll cheer instead,
    Some other man; for when my voice ascends a
Tall pinnacle of praise, and at high C
  Sustains a chosen name, it shan't be said
    My influence is naught but influenza.




A CHEATING PREACHER


Munhall, to save my soul you bravely try,
Although, to save my soul, I can't say why.
'Tis naught to you, to me however much--
Why, bless it! you might save a million such
Yet lose your own; for still the "means of grace"
That you employ to turn us from the place
By the arch-enemy of souls frequented
Are those which to ensnare us he invented!
I do not say you utter falsehoods--I
Would scorn to give to ministers the lie:
They cannot fight--their calling has estopped it.
True, I did not persuade them to adopt it.
But, Munhall, when you say the Devil dwells
In all the breasts of all the infidels--
Making a lot of individual Hells
In gentlemen instinctively who shrink
From thinking anything that you could think,
You talk as I should if some world I trod
Where lying is acceptable to God.
I don't at all object--forbid it Heaven!--
That your discourse you temperately leaven
With airy reference to wicked souls
Cursing impenitent on glowing coals,
Nor quarrel with your fancy, blithe and fine,
Which represents the wickedest as mine.
Each ornament of style my spirit eases:
The subject saddens, but the manner pleases.
But when you "deal damnation round" 'twere sweet
To think hereafter that you did not cheat.
Deal, and let all accept what you allot 'em.
But, blast you! you are dealing from the bottom!




A CROCODILE


Nay, Peter Robertson, 'tis not for you
  To blubber o'er Max Taubles for he's dead.
By Heaven! my hearty, if you only knew
  How better is a grave-worm in the head
Than brains like yours--how far more decent, too,
  A tomb in far Corea than a bed
Where Peter lies with Peter, you would covet
His happier state and, dying, learn to love it.

In the recesses of the silent tomb
  No Maunderings of yours disturb the peace.
Your mental bag-pipe, droning like the gloom
  Of Hades audible, perforce must cease
From troubling further; and that crack o' doom,
  Your mouth, shaped like a long bow, shall release
In vain such shafts of wit as it can utter--
The ear of death can't even hear them flutter.




THE AMERICAN PARTY


Oh, Marcus D. Boruck, me hearty,
  I sympathize wid ye, poor lad!
A man that's shot out of his party
  Is mighty onlucky, bedad!
  An' the sowl o' that man is sad.

But, Marcus, gossoon, ye desarve it--
  Ye know for yerself that ye do,
For ye j'ined not intendin' to sarve it,
  But hopin' to make it sarve you,
  Though the roll of its members wuz two.

The other wuz Pixley, an' "Surely,"
  Ye said, "he's a kite that wall sail."
An' so ye hung till him securely,
  Enactin' the role of a tail.
  But there wuzn't the ghost of a gale!

But the party to-day has behind it
  A powerful backin', I'm told;
For just enough Irish have j'ined it
  (An' I'm m'anin' to be enrolled)
  To kick ye out into the cold.

It's hard on ye, darlint, I'm thinkin'--
  So young--so American, too--
Wid bypassers grinnin' an' winkin',
  An' sayin', wid ref'rence to you:
"Get onto the murtherin' Joo!"

Republicans never will take ye--
  They had ye for many a year;
An' Dimocrats--angels forsake ye!--
  If ever ye come about here
  We'll brand ye and scollop yer ear!




UNCOLONELED


Though war-signs fail in time of peace, they say,
  Two awful portents gloom the public mind:
All Mexico is arming for the fray
  And Colonel Mark McDonald has resigned!
  We know not by what instinct he divined
The coming trouble--may be, like the steed
  Described by Job, he smelled the fight afar.
Howe'er it be, he left, and for that deed
  Is an aspirant to the G.A.R.
When cannon flame along the Rio Grande
A citizen's commission will be handy.




THE GATES AJAR


The Day of Judgment spread its glare
  O'er continents and seas.
The graves cracked open everywhere,
  Like pods of early peas.

Up to the Court of Heaven sped
  The souls of all mankind;
Republicans were at the head
  And Democrats behind.

Reub. Lloyd was there before the tube
  Of Gabriel could call:
The dead in Christ rise first, and Reub.
  Had risen first of all.

He sat beside the Throne of Flame
  As, to the trumpet's sound,
Four statesmen of the Party Came
  And ranged themselves around--

Pure spirits shining like the sun,
  From taint and blemish free--
Great William Stow was there for one,
  And George A. Knight for three.

Souls less indubitably white
  Approached with anxious air,
Judge Blake at head of them by right
  Of having been a Mayor.

His ermine he had donned again,
  Long laid away in gums.
'Twas soiled a trifle by the stains
  Of politicians' thumbs.

Then Knight addressed the Judge of Heaven:
  "Your Honor, would it trench
On custom here if Blake were given
  A seat upon the Bench?"

'Twas done. "Tom Shannon!" Peter cried.
  He came, without ado,
_In forma pauperis_ was tried,
  And was acquitted, too!

Stow rose, remarking: "I concur."
  Lloyd added: "That suits _us_.
I move Tom's nomination, sir,
  Be made unanimous."




TIDINGS OF GOOD


Old Nick from his place of last resort
  Came up and looked the world over.
He saw how the grass of the good was short
  And the wicked lived in clover.

And he gravely said: "This is all, all wrong,
  And never by me intended.
If to me the power should ever belong
  I shall have this thing amended."

He looked so solemn and good and wise
  As he made this observation
That the men who heard him believed their eyes
  Instead of his reputation.

So they bruited the matter about, and each
  Reported the words as nearly
As memory served--with additional speech
  To bring out the meaning clearly.

The consequence was that none understood,
  And the wildest rumors started
Of something intended to help the good
  And injure the evil-hearted.

Then Robert Morrow was seen to smile
  With a bright and lively joyance.
"A man," said he, "that is free from guile
  Will now be free from annoyance.

"The Featherstones doubtless will now increase
  And multiply like the rabbits,
While jailers, deputy sheriffs, police,
  And writers will form good habits.

"The widows more easily robbed will be,
  And no juror will ever heed 'em,
But open his purse to my eloquent plea
  For security, gain, or freedom."

When Benson heard of the luck of the good
  (He was eating his dinner) he muttered:
"It cannot help _me_, for 'tis understood
  My bread is already buttered.

"My plats of surveys are all false, they say,
  But that cannot greatly matter
To me, for I'll tell the jurors that they
  May lick, if they please, my platter."




ARBORICULTURE

    [Californians are asking themselves how Joaquin Miller will
    make the trees grow which he proposes to plant in the form of
    a Maltese cross on Goat Island, in San Francisco Bay.--_New
    York Graphic_.]


You may say they won't grow, and say they'll decay--
Say it again till you're sick of the say,
Get up on your ear, blow your blaring bazoo
And hire a hall to proclaim it; and you
May stand on a stump with a lifted hand
As a pine may stand or a redwood stand,
And stick to your story and cheek it through.
But I point with pride to the far divide
Where the Snake from its groves is seen to glide--
To Mariposa's arboreal suit,
And the shaggy shoulders of Shasta Butte,
And the feathered firs of Siskiyou;
And I swear as I sit on my marvelous hair--
I roll my marvelous eyes and swear,
And sneer, and ask where would your forests be
To-day if it hadn't been for me!
Then I rise tip-toe, with a brow of brass,
Like a bully boy with an eye of glass;
I look at my gum sprouts, red and blue,
And I say it loud and I say it low:
"They know their man and you bet they'll grow!"




A SILURIAN HOLIDAY


'Tis Master Fitch, the editor;
  He takes an holiday.
Now wherefore, venerable sir,
  So resolutely gay?

He lifts his head, he laughs aloud,
  Odzounds! 'tis drear to see!
"Because the Boodle-Scribbler crowd
  Will soon be far from me.

"Full many a year I've striven well
  To freeze the caitiffs out
By making this good town a Hell,
  But still they hang about.

"They maken mouths and eke they grin
  At the dollar limit game;
And they are holpen in that sin
  By many a wicked dame.

"In sylvan bowers hence I'll dwell
  My bruised mind to ease.
Farewell, ye urban scenes, farewell!
  Hail, unfamiliar trees!"

Forth Master Fitch did bravely hie,
  And all the country folk
Besought him that he come not nigh
  The deadly poison oak!

He smiled a cheerful smile (the day
  Was straightway overcast)--
The poison oak along his way
  Was blighted as he passed!




REJECTED


When Dr. Charles O'Donnell died
They sank a box with him inside.

The plate with his initials three
Was simply graven--"C.O.D."

That night two demons of the Pit
Adown the coal-hole shunted it.

Ten million million leagues it fell,
Alighting at the gate of Hell.

Nick looked upon it with surprise,
A night-storm darkening his eyes.

"They've sent this rubbish, C.O.D.--
I'll never pay a cent!" said he.




JUDEX JUDICATUS


Judge Armstrong, when the poor have sought your aid,
To be released from vows that they have made
In haste, and leisurely repented, you,
As stern as Rhadamanthus (Minos too,
And AEeacus) have drawn your fierce brows down
And petrified them with a moral frown!
With iron-faced rigor you have made them run
The gauntlet of publicity--each Hun
Or Vandal of the public press allowed
To throw their households open to the crowd
And bawl their secret bickerings aloud.
When Wealth before you suppliant appears,
Bang! go the doors and open fly your ears!
The blinds are drawn, the lights diminished burn,
Lest eyes too curious should look and learn
That gold refines not, sweetens not a life
Of conjugal brutality and strife--
That vice is vulgar, though it gilded shine
Upon the curve of a judicial spine.
The veiled complainant's whispered evidence,
The plain collusion and the no defense,
The sealed exhibits and the secret plea,
The unrecorded and unseen decree,
The midnight signature and--_chink! chink! chink!_--
Nay, pardon, upright Judge, I did but think
I heard that sound abhorred of honest men;
No doubt it was the scratching of your pen.

O California! long-enduring land,
Where Judges fawn upon the Golden Hand,
Proud of such service to that rascal thing
As slaves would blush to render to a king--
Judges, of judgment destitute and heart,
Of conscience conscious only by the smart
From the recoil (so insight is enlarged)
Of duty accidentally discharged;--
Invoking still a "song o' sixpence" from
The Scottish fiddle of each lusty palm,
Thy Judges, California, skilled to play
This silent music, through the livelong-day
Perform obsequious before the rich,
And still the more they scratch the more they itch!




ON THE WEDDING OF AN AERONAUT


Aeronaut, you're fairly caught,
  Despite your bubble's leaven:
Out of the skies a lady's eyes
  Have brought you down to Heaven!

No more, no more you'll freely soar
  Above the grass and gravel:
Henceforth you'll walk--and she will chalk
  The line that you're to travel!




A HASTY INFERENCE


The Devil one day, coming up from the Pit,
  All grimy with perspiration,
Applied to St. Peter and begged he'd admit
  Him a moment for consultation.

The Saint showed him in where the Master reclined
  On the throne where petitioners sought him;
Both bowed, and the Evil One opened his mind
  Concerning the business that brought him:

"For ten million years I've been kept in a stew
  Because you have thought me immoral;
And though I have had my opinion of you,
  You've had the best end of the quarrel.

"But now--well, I venture to hope that the past
  With its misunderstandings we'll smother;
And you, sir, and I, sir, be throned here at last
  As equals, the one to the other."

"Indeed!" said the Master (I cannot convey
  A sense of his tone by mere letters)
"What makes you presume you'll be bidden to stay
  Up here on such terms with your betters?"

"Why, sure you can't mean it!" said Satan. "I've seen
  How Stanford and Crocker you've nourished,
And Huntington--bless me! the three like a green
  Umbrageous great bay-tree have flourished.

They are fat, they are rolling in gold, they command
  All sources and well-springs of power;
You've given them houses, you've given them land--
  Before them the righteous all cower."

"What of that?" "What of that?" cried the Father of Sin;
  "Why, I thought when I saw you were winking
At crimes such as theirs that perhaps you had been
  Converted to my way of thinking."




A VOLUPTUARY


Who's this that lispeth in the thickening throng
Which crowds to claim distinction in my song?
Fresh from "the palms and temples of the South,"
The mixed aromas quarrel in his mouth:
Of orange blossoms this the lingering gale,
And that the odor of a spicy tale.
Sir, in thy pleasure-dome down by the sea
(No finer one did Kubla Khan decree)
Where, Master of the Revels, thou dost stand
With joys and mysteries on either hand,
Dost keep a poet to report the rites
And sing the tale of those Elysian nights?
Faith, sir, I'd like the place if not too young.
I'm no great bard, but--I can hold my tongue.




AD CATTONUM


I know not, Mr. Catton, who you are,
Nor very clearly why; but you go far
To show that you are many things beside
A Chilean Consul with a tempting hide;
But what they are I hardly could explain
Without afflicting you with mental pain.
Your name (gods! what a name the muse to woo--
Suggesting cats, and hinting kittens, too!)
Points to an origin--perhaps Maltese,
Perhaps Angoran--where the wicked cease
From fiddling, and the animals that grow
The strings that groan to the tormenting bow
Live undespoiled of their insides, resigned
To give their name and nature to mankind.
With Chilean birth your name but poorly tallies;
The test is--Did you ever sell tamales?

It matters very little, though, my boy,
If you're from Chile or from Illinois;
You can't, because you serve a foreign land,
Spit with impunity on ours, expand,
Cock-turkeywise, and strut with blind conceit,
All heedless of the hearts beneath your feet,
Fling falsehoods as a sower scatters grain
And, for security, invoke disdain.
Sir, there are laws that men of sense observe,
No matter whence they come nor whom they serve--
The laws of courtesy; and these forbid
You to malign, as recently you did,
As servant of another State, a State
Wherein your duties all are concentrate;
Branding its Ministers as rogues--in short,
Inviting cuffs as suitable retort.

Chileno or American, 'tis one--
Of any land a citizen, or none--
If like a new Thersites here you rail,
Loading with libels every western gale,
You'll feel the cudgel on your scurvy hump
Impinging with a salutary thump.
'Twill make you civil or 'twill make you jump!




THE NATIONAL GUARDSMAN


I'm a gorgeous golden hero
  And my trade is taking life.
Hear the twittle-twittle-tweero
  Of my sibillating fife
And the rub-a-dub-a-dum
  Of my big bass drum!
I'm an escort strong and bold,
  The Grand Army to protect.
My countenance is cold
  And my attitude erect.
I'm a Californian Guard
  And my banner flies aloft,
But the stones are O, so hard!
  And my feet are O, so soft!




THE BARKING WEASEL


You say, John Irish, Mr. Taylor hath
  A painted beard. Quite likely that is true,
And sure 'tis natural you spend your wrath
  On what has been least merciful to you.
By Taylor's chin, if I am not mistaken,
You like a rat have recently been shaken.

To wear a beard of artificial hue
  May be or this or that, I know not what;
But, faith, 'tis better to be black-and-blue
  In beard from dallying with brush and pot
Than to be so in body from the beating
That hardy rogues get when detected cheating.

You're whacked about the mazzard rather more
  Of late than any other man in town.
Certes your vulnerable back is sore
  And tender, too, your corrigible crown.
In truth your whole periphery discloses
More vivid colors than a bed of posies!

You call it glory! Put your tongue in sheath!--
  Scars got in battle, even if on the breast,
May be a shameful record if, beneath,
  A robber heart a lawless strife attest.
John Sullivan had wounds, and Paddy Ryan--
Nay, as to that, even Masten has, and Bryan.

'Tis willingly conceded you've a knack
  At holding the attention of the town;
The worse for you when you have on your back
  What did not grow there--prithee put it down!
For pride kills thrift, and you lack board and lodging,
Even while the brickbats of renown you're dodging.




A REAR ELEVATION

    [He can speak with his eyes, his hands, arms, legs, body--nay,
    with his very bones, for he turned the broad of his back upon
    us in "Conrad," the other night, and his shoulder-blades
    spoke to us a volume of hesitation, fear, submission,
    desperation--everything which could haunt a man at the moment
    of inevitable detection.--_A "Dramatic Critic."_]


Once Moses (in Scripture the story is told)
Entreated the favor God's face to behold.
Compassion divine the petition denied
Lest vision be blasted and body be fried.
Yet this much, the Record informs us, took place:
Jehovah, concealing His terrible face,
Protruded His rear from behind a great rock,
And edification ensued without shock.
So godlike Salvini, lest worshipers die,
Averting the blaze of his withering eye,
Tempers his terrors and shows to the pack
Of feeble adorers the broad of his back.
The fires of their altars, which, paled and declined
Before him, burn all the more brightly behind.
O happy adorers, to care not at all
Where fawning may tickle or lip-service fall!




IN UPPER SAN FRANCISCO


I heard that Heaven was bright and fair,
And politicians dwelt not there.

'Twas said by knowing ones that they
Were in the Elsewhere--so to say.

So, waking from my last long sleep,
I took my place among the sheep.

I passed the gate--Saint Peter eyed
Me sharply as I stepped inside.

He thought, as afterward I learned,
That I was Chris, the Unreturned.

The new Jerusalem--ah me,
It was a sorry sight to see!

The mansions of the blest were there,
And mostly they were fine and fair;

But O, such streets!--so deep and wide,
And all unpaved, from side to side!

And in a public square there grew
A blighted tree, most sad to view.

From off its trunk the bark was ripped--
Its very branches all were stripped!

An angel perched upon the fence
With all the grace of indolence.

"Celestial bird," I cried, in pain,
"What vandal wrought this wreck? Explain."

He raised his eyelids as if tired:
"What is a Vandal?" he inquired.

"This is the Tree of Life. 'Twas stripped
By Durst and Siebe, who have shipped

"The bark across the Jordan--see?--
And sold it to a tannery."

"Alas," I sighed, "their old-time tricks!
That pavement, too, of golden bricks--

"They've gobbled that?" But with a scowl,
"You greatly wrong them," said the fowl:

"'Twas Gilleran did that, I fear--
Head of the Street Department here."

"What! what!" cried I--"you let such chaps
Come here? You've Satan, too, perhaps."

"We had him, yes, but off he went,
Yet showed some purpose to repent;

"But since your priests and parsons filled
The place with those their preaching killed"--

(Here Siebe passed along with Durst,
Psalming as if their lungs would burst)--

"He swears his foot no more shall press
('Tis cloven, anyhow, I guess)

"Our soil. In short, he's out on strike--
But devils are not all alike."

Lo! Gilleran came down the street,
Pressing the soil with broad, flat feet!




NIMROD


There were brave men, some one has truly said,
Before Atrides (those were mostly dead
Behind him) and ere you could e'er occur
Actaeon lived, Nimrod and Bahram-Gur.
In strength and speed and daring they excelled:
The stag they overtook, the lion felled.
Ah, yes, great hunters flourished before you,
And--for Munchausen lived--great talkers too.
There'll be no more; there's much to kill, but--well,
_You_ have left nothing in the world to tell!




CENSOR LITERARUM


So, Parson Stebbins, you've released your chin
  To say that here, and here, we press-folk ail.
'Tis a great thing an editor to skin
  And hang his faulty pelt upon a nail
  (If over-eared, it has, at least, no tail)
And, for an admonition against sin,
Point out its maculations with a rod,
And act, in short, the gentleman of God.

'Twere needless cruelty to spoil your sport
  By comment, critical or merely rude;
But you, too, have, according to report,
  Despite your posing as a holy dude,
  Imperfect spiritual pulchritude
For so severe a judge. May't please the court,
We shall appeal and take our case at once
Before that higher court, a taller dunce.

Sir, what were _you_ without the press? What spreads
  The fame of your existence, once a week,
From the Pacific Mail dock to the Heads,
  Warning the people you're about to wreak
  Upon the human ear your Sunday freak?--
Whereat the most betake them to their bed
Though some prefer to slumber in the pews
And nod assent to your hypnotic views.

Unhappy man! can you not still your tongue
  When (like a luckless brat afflict with worms,
By cruel fleas intolerably stung,
  Or with a pang in its small lap) it squirms?
Still must it vulgarize your feats of lung?
No preaching better were, the sun beneath,
If you had nothing there behind your teeth.




BORROWED BRAINS


Writer folk across the bay
Take the pains to see and say--
All their upward palms in air:
"Joaquin Miller's cut his hair!"
Hasten, hasten, writer folk--
In the gutters rake and poke,
If by God's exceeding grace
You may hit upon the place
Where the barber threw at length
Samson's literary strength.
Find it, find it if you can;
Happy the successful man!
He has but to put one strand
In his beaver's inner band
And his intellect will soar
As it never did before!
While an inch of it remains
He will noted be for brains,
And at last ('twill so befall)
Fit to cease to write at all.




THE FYGHTYNGE SEVENTH


It is the gallant Seventh--
  It fyghteth faste and free!
God wot the where it fyghteth
  I ne desyre to be.

The Gonfalon it flyeth,
  Seeming a Flayme in Sky;
The Bugel loud yblowen is,
  Which sayeth, Doe and dye!

And (O good Saints defende us
  Agaynst the Woes of Warr)
Drawn Tongues are flashing deadly
  To smyte the Foeman sore!

With divers kinds of Riddance
  The smoaking Earth is wet,
And all aflowe to seaward goe
  The Torrents wide of Sweat!

The Thunder of the Captens,
  And eke the Shouting, mayketh
Such horrid Din the Soule within
  The boddy of me quayketh!

Who fyghteth the bold Seventh?
  What haughty Power defyes?
Their Colonel 'tis they drubben sore,
  And dammen too his Eyes!




INDICTED


Dear Bruner, once we had a little talk
  (That is to say, 'twas I did all the talking)
About the manner of your moral walk:
  How devious the trail you made in stalking,
On level ground, your law-protected game--
"Another's Dollar" is, I think, its name.

Your crooked course more recently is not
  So blamable; for, truly, you have stumbled
On evil days; and 'tis your luckless lot
  To traverse spaces (with a spirit humbled,
Contrite, dejected and divinely sad)
Where, 'tis confessed, the walking's rather bad.

Jordan, the song says, is a road (I thought
  It was a river) that is hard to travel;
And Dublin, if you'd find it, must be sought
  Along a highway with more rocks than gravel.
In difficulty neither can compete
With that wherein you navigate your feet.

As once George Gorham said of Pixley, so
  I say of you: "The prison yawns before you,
The turnkey stalks behind!" Now will you go?
  Or lag, and let that functionary floor you?
To change the metaphor--you seem to be
Between Judge Wallace and the deep, deep sea!




OVER THE BORDER


O, justice, you have fled, to dwell
  In Mexico, unstrangled,
Lest you should hang as high as--well,
    As Haman dangled.

(I know not if his cord he twanged,
  Or the King proved forgiving.
'Tis hard to think of Haman hanged,
    And Haymond living.)

Yes, as I said: in mortal fear
  To Mexico you journeyed;
For you were on your trial here,
    And ill attorneyed.

The Law had long regarded you
  As an extreme offender.
Religion looked upon you, too,
    With thoughts untender.

The Press to you was cold as snow,
  For sin you'd always call so.
In Politics you were _de trop_,
    In Morals also.

All this is accurately true
  And, faith! there might be more said;
But--well, to save your thrapple you
    Fled, as aforesaid.

You're down in Mexico--that's plain
  As that the sun is risen;
For Daniel Burns, down there, his chain
  Drags round in prison.




ONE JUDGE


Wallace, created on a noble plan
To show us that a Judge can be a Man;
Through moral mire exhaling mortal stench
God-guided sweet and foot-clean to the Bench;
In salutation here and sign I lift
A hand as free as yours from lawless thrift,
A heart--ah, would I truly could proclaim
My bosom lighted with so pure a flame!
Alas, not love of justice moves my pen
To praise, or to condemn, my fellow men.
Good will and ill its busy point incite:
I do but gratify them when I write.
In palliation, though, I'd humbly state,
I love the righteous and the wicked hate.
So, sir, although we differ we agree,
Our work alike from persecution free,
And Heaven, approving you, consents to me.
Take, therefore, from this not all useless hand
The crown of honor--not in all the land
One honest man dissenting from the choice,
Nor in approval one Fred. Crocker's voice!




TO AN INSOLENT ATTORNEY


So, Hall McAllister, you'll not be warned--
My protest slighted, admonition scorned!
To save your scoundrel client from a cell
As loth to swallow him as he to swell
Its sum of meals insurgent (it decries
All wars intestinal with meats that rise)
You turn your scurril tongue against the press
And damn the agency you ought to bless.
Had not the press with all its hundred eyes
Discerned the wolf beneath the sheep's disguise
And raised the cry upon him, he to-day
Would lack your company, and you would lack his pay.

Talk not of "hire" and consciences for sale--
You whose profession 'tis to threaten, rail,
Calumniate and libel at the will
Of any villain who can pay the bill--
You whose most honest dollars all were got
By saying for a fee "the thing that's not!"
To you 'tis one, to challenge or defend;
Clients are means, their money is an end.
In my profession sometimes, as in yours
Always, a payment large enough secures
A mercenary service to defend
The guilty or the innocent to rend.
But mark the difference, nor think it slight:
_We_ do not hold it proper, just and right;
Of selfish lies a little still we shame
And give our villainies another name.
Hypocrisy's an ugly vice, no doubt,
But blushing sinners can't get on without.
Happy the lawyer!--at his favored hands
Nor truth nor decency the world demands.
Secure in his immunity from shame,
His cheek ne'er kindles with the tell-tale flame.
His brains for sale, morality for hire,
In every land and century a licensed liar!

No doubt, McAllister, you can explain
How honorable 'tis to lie for gain,
Provided only that the jury's made
To understand that lying is your trade.
A hundred thousand volumes, broad and flat,
(The Bible not included) proving that,
Have been put forth, though still the doubt remains
If God has read them with befitting pains.
No Morrow could get justice, you'll declare,
If none who knew him foul affirmed him fair.
Ingenious man! how easy 'tis to raise
An argument to justify the course that pays!

I grant you, if you like, that men may need
The services performed for crime by greed,--
Grant that the perfect welfare of the State
Requires the aid of those who in debate
As mercenaries lost in early youth
The fine distinction between lie and truth--
Who cheat in argument and set a snare
To take the feet of Justice unaware--
Who serve with livelier zeal when rogues assist
With perjury, embracery (the list
Is long to quote) than when an honest soul,
Scorning to plot, conspire, intrigue, cajole,
Reminds them (their astonishment how great!)
He'd rather suffer wrong than perpetrate.
I grant, in short, 'tis better all around
That ambidextrous consciences abound
In courts of law to do the dirty work
That self-respecting scavengers would shirk.
What then? Who serves however clean a plan
By doing dirty work, he is a dirty man!




ACCEPTED


Charles Shortridge once to St. Peter came.
"Down!" cried the saint with his face aflame;
"'Tis writ that every hardy liar
Shall dwell forever and ever in fire!"
"That's what I said the night that I died,"
The sinner, turning away, replied.
"What! _you_ said that?" cried the saint--"what! what!
_You_ said 'twas so writ? Then, faith, 'tis _not!_
I'm a devil at quoting, but I begin
To fail in my memory. Pray walk in."




A PROMISED FAST TRAIN


I turned my eyes upon the Future's scroll
And saw its pictured prophecies unroll.

I saw that magical life-laden train
Flash its long glories o'er Nebraska's plain.

I saw it smoothly up the mountain glide.
"O happy, happy passengers!" I cried.

For Pleasure, singing, drowned the engine's roar,
And Hope on joyous pinions flew before.

Then dived the train adown the sunset slope--
Pleasure was silent and unseen was Hope.

Crashes and shrieks attested the decay
That greed had wrought upon that iron way.

The rusted rails broke down the rotting ties,
And clouds of flying spikes obscured the skies.

My coward eyes I drew away, distressed,
And fixed them on the terminus to-West,

Where soon, its melancholy tale to tell,
One bloody car-wheel wabbled in and fell!




ONE OF THE SAINTS


Big Smith is an Oakland School Board man,
And he looks as good as ever he can;
And he's such a cold and a chaste Big Smith
That snowflakes all are his kin and kith.
Wherever his eye he chances to throw
The crystals of ice begin to grow;
And the fruits and flowers he sees are lost
By the singeing touch of a sudden frost.
The women all shiver whenever he's near,
And look upon _us_ with a look austere--
Effect of the Smithian atmosphere.
Such, in a word, is the moral plan
Of the Big, Big Smith, the School Board man.
When told that Madame Ferrier had taught
_Hernani_ in school, his fist he brought
Like a trip-hammer down on his bulbous knee,
And he roared: "Her Nanny? By gum, we'll see
If the public's time she dares devote
To the educatin' of any dam goat!"
"You do not entirely comprehend--
_Hernani's_ a play," said his learned friend,
"By Victor Hugo--immoral and bad.
What's worse, it's French!" "Well, well, my lad,"
Said Smith, "if he cuts a swath so wide
I'll have him took re'glar up and tried!"
And he smiled so sweetly the other chap
Thought that himself was a Finn or Lapp
Caught in a storm of his native snows,
With a purple ear and an azure nose.
The Smith continued: "I never pursue
Immoral readin'." And that is true:
He's a saint of remarkably high degree,
With a mind as chaste as a mind can be;
But read!--the devil a word can he!




A MILITARY INCIDENT


Dawn heralded the coming sun--
  Fort Douglas was computing
The minutes--and the sunrise gun
  Was manned for his saluting.

The gunner at that firearm stood,
  The which he slowly loaded,
When, bang!--I know not how it could,
  But sure the charge exploded!

Yes, to that veteran's surprise
  The gun went off sublimely,
And both his busy arms likewise
Went off with it, untimely.

Then said that gunner to his mate
  (He was from Ballyshannon):
"Bedad, the sun's a minute late,
  Accardin' to this cannon!"




SUBSTANCE VERSUS SHADOW


So, gentle critics, you would have me tilt,
Not at the guilty, only just at Guilt!--
Spare the offender and condemn Offense,
And make life miserable to Pretense!
"Whip Vice and Folly--that is satire's use--
But be not personal, for _that's_ abuse;
Nor e'er forget what, 'like a razor keen,
Wounds with a touch that's neither felt nor seen.'"
Well, friends, I venture, destitute of awe,
To think that razor but an old, old saw,
A trifle rusty; and a wound, I'm sure,
That's felt not, seen not, one can well endure.
Go to! go to!--you're as unfitted quite
To give advice to writers as to write.
I find in Folly and in Vice a lack
Of head to hit, and for the lash no back;
Whilst Pixley has a pow that's easy struck,
And though good Deacon Fitch (a Fitch for luck!)
Has none, yet, lest he go entirely free,
God gave to him a corn, a heel to me.
He, also, sets his face (so like a flint
The wonder grows that Pickering doesn't skin't)
With cold austerity, against these wars
On scamps--'tis Scampery that _he_ abhors!
Behold advance in dignity and state--
Grave, smug, serene, indubitably great--
Stanford, philanthropist! One hand bestows
In alms what t'other one as justice owes.
Rascality attends him like a shade,
But closes, woundless, o'er my baffled blade,
Its limbs unsevered, spirit undismayed.
Faith! I'm for something can be made to feel,
If, like Pelides, only in the heel.
The fellow's self invites assault; his crimes
Will each bear killing twenty thousand times!
Anon Creed Haymond--but the list is long
Of names to point the moral of my song.
Rogues, fools, impostors, sycophants, they rise,
They foul the earth and horrify the skies--
With Mr. Huntington (sole honest man
In all the reek of that rapscallion clan)
Denouncing Theft as hard as e'er he can!




THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC MORALS


The Senate met in Sacramento city;
On public morals it had no committee
Though greatly these abounded. Soon the quiet
Was broken by the Senators in riot.
Now, at the end of their contagious quarrels,
There's a committee but no public morals.




CALIFORNIA

    [The Chinaman's Assailant was allowed to walk quietly
    away, although the street was filled with
    pedestrians.--_Newspaper_.]


Why should he not have been allowed
To thread with peaceful feet the crowd
  Which filled that Christian street?
The Decalogue he had observed,
From Faith in Jesus had not swerved,
And scorning pious platitudes,
He saw in the Beatitudes
  A lamp to guide his feet.

He knew that Jonah downed the whale
And made no bones of it. The tale
  That Ananias told
He swore was true. He had no doubt
That Daniel laid the lions out.
In short, he had all holiness,
All meekness and all lowliness,
  And was with saints enrolled.

'Tis true, some slight excess of zeal
Sincerely to promote the weal
  Of this most Christian state
Had moved him rudely to divide
The queue that was a pagan's pride,
And in addition certify
The Faith by making fur to fly
  From pelt as well as pate?

But, Heavenly Father, thou dost know
That in this town these actions go
  For nothing worth a name.
Nay, every editorial ass,
To prove they never come to pass
Will damn his soul eternally,
Although in his own journal he
  May read the printed shame.

From bloody hands the reins of pow'r
Fall slack; the high-decisive hour
  Strikes not for liars' ears.
Remove, O Father, the disgrace
That stains our California's face,
And consecrate to human good
The strength of her young womanhood
  And all her golden years!




DE YOUNG--A PROPHECY


Running for Senator with clumsy pace,
He stooped so low, to win at least a place,
That Fortune, tempted by a mark so droll,
Sprang in an kicked him to the winning pole.




TO EITHER


      Back further than
      I know, in San
Francisco dwelt a wealthy man.
      So rich was he
      That none could be
Wise, good and great in like degree.

      'Tis true he wrought,
      In deed or thought,
But few of all the things he ought;
      But men said: "Who
      Would wish him to?
Great souls are born to be, not do!"

      One thing, indeed,
      He did, we read,
Which was becoming, all agreed:
      Grown provident,
      Ere life was spent
He built a mighty monument.

      For longer than
      I know, in San
Francisco lived a beggar man;
      And when in bed
      They found him dead--
"Just like the scamp!" the people said.

      He died, they say,
      On the same day
His wealthy neighbor passed away.
      What matters it
      When beggars quit
Their beats? I answer: Not a bit.

      They got a spade
      And pick and made
A hole, and there the chap was laid.
      "He asked for bread,"
      'Twas neatly said:
"He'll get not even a stone instead."

      The years rolled round:
      His humble mound
Sank to the level of the ground;
      And men forgot
      That the bare spot
Was like (and was) the beggar's lot.

      Forgotten, too,
      Was t'other, who
Had reared the monument to woo
      Inconstant Fame,
      Though still his name
Shouted in granite just the same.

      That name, I swear,
      They both did bear
The beggar and the millionaire.
      That lofty tomb,
      Then, honored--whom?
For argument here's ample room.

      I'll not debate,
      But only state
The scamp first claimed it at the Gate.
      St. Peter, proud
      To serve him, bowed
And showed him to the softest cloud.




DISAPPOINTMENT


The Senate woke; the Chairman's snore
     Was stilled, its echoes balking;
The startled members dreamed no more,
For Steele, who long had held the floor,
     Had suddenly ceased talking.

As, like Elijah, in his pride,
     He to his seat was passing,
"Go up thou baldhead!" Reddy cried.
Then six fierce bears ensued and tried
     To sunder him for "sassing."

Two seized his legs, and one his head,
     The fourth his trunk, to munch on;
The fifth preferred an arm instead;
The last, with rueful visage, said:
     "Pray what have _I_ for luncheon?"

Then to that disappointed bear
     Said Steele, serene and chipper,
"My friend, you shall not lack your share:
Look in the Treasury, and there
     You'll find his other flipper."




THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW OF THEFT


In fair Yosemite, that den of thieves
  Wherein the minions of the moon divide
The travelers' purses, lo! the Devil grieves,
  His larger share as leader still denied.

El Capitan, foreseeing that _his_ reign
  May be disputed too, beclouds his head.
The joyous Bridal Veil is torn in twain
  And the crepe steamer dangles there instead.

The Vernal Fall abates her pleasant speed
  And hesitates to take the final plunge,
For rumors reach her that another greed
  Awaits her in the Valley of the Sponge.

The Brothers envy the accord of mind
  And peace of purpose (by the good deplored
As honor among Commissioners) which bind
  That confraternity of crime, the Board.

The Half-Dome bows its riven face to weep,
  But not, as formerly, because bereft:
Prophetic dreams afflict him when asleep
  Of losing his remaining half by theft.

Ambitious knaves! has not the upper sod
  Enough of room for every crime that crawls
But you must loot the Palaces of God
  And daub your filthy names upon the walls?




DOWN AMONG THE DEAD MEN


Within my dark and narrow bed
  I rested well, new-laid:
I heard above my fleshless head
  The grinding of a spade.

A gruffer note ensued and grew
  To harsh and harsher strains:
The poet Welcker then I knew
  Was "snatching" my remains.

"O Welcker, let your hand be stayed
  And leave me here in peace.
Of your revenge you should have made
  An end with my decease."

"Hush, Mouldyshanks, and hear my moan:
  I once, as you're aware,
Was eminent in letters--known
  And honored everywhere.

"My splendor made all Berkeley bright
  And Sacramento blind.
Men swore no writer e'er could write
  Like me--if I'd a mind.

"With honors all insatiate,
  With curst ambition smit,
Too far, alas! I tempted fate--
  I _published_ what I'd writ!

"Good Heaven! with what a hunger wild
  Oblivion swallows fame!
Men who have known me from a child
  Forget my very name!

"Even creditors with searching looks
  My face cannot recall;
My heaviest one--he prints my books--
  Oblivious most of all.

"O I should feel a sweet content
  If one poor dun his claim
Would bring to me for settlement,
  And bully me by name.

"My dog is at my gate forlorn;
  It howls through all the night,
And when I greet it in the morn
  It answers with a bite!"

"O Poet, what in Satan's name
  To me's all this ado?
Will snatching me restore the fame
  That printing snatched from you?"

"Peace, dread Remains; I'm not about
  To do a deed of sin.
I come not here to hale you out--
  I'm trying to get in."




THE LAST MAN


I dreamed that Gabriel took his horn
On Resurrection's fateful morn,
And lighting upon Laurel Hill
Blew long, blew loud, blew high and shrill.
The houses compassing the ground
Rattled their windows at the sound.
But no one rose. "Alas!" said he,
"What lazy bones these mortals be!"
Again he plied the horn, again
Deflating both his lungs in vain;
Then stood astonished and chagrined
At raising nothing but the wind.
At last he caught the tranquil eye
Of an observer standing by--
Last of mankind, not doomed to die.
To him thus Gabriel: "Sir, I pray
This mystery you'll clear away.
Why do I sound my note in vain?
Why spring they not from out the plain?
Where's Luning, Blythe and Michael Reese,
Magee, who ran the _Golden Fleece?_
Where's Asa Fisk? Jim Phelan, who
Was thought to know a thing or two
Of land which rose but never sank?
Where's Con O'Conor of the Bank,
And all who consecrated lands
Of old by laying on of hands?
I ask of them because their worth
Was known in all they wished--the earth.
Brisk boomers once, alert and wise,
Why don't they rise, why don't they rise?"
The man replied: "Reburied long
With others of the shrouded throng
In San Mateo--carted there
And dumped promiscuous, anywhere,
In holes and trenches--all misfits--
Mixed up with one another's bits:
One's back-bone with another's shin,
A third one's skull with a fourth one's grin--
Your eye was never, never fixed
Upon a company so mixed!
Go now among them there and blow:
'Twill be as good as any show
To see them, when they hear the tones,
Compiling one another's bones!
But here 'tis vain to sound and wait:
Naught rises here but real estate.
I own it all and shan't disgorge.
Don't know me? I am Henry George."




ARBOR DAY


Hasten, children, black and white--
Celebrate the yearly rite.
Every pupil plant a tree:
It will grow some day to be
Big and strong enough to bear
A School Director hanging there.




THE PIUTE


Unbeautiful is the Piute!
  Howe'er bedecked with bravery,
  His person is unsavory--
Of soap he's destitute.

He multiplies upon the earth
  In spite of all admonishing;
  All censure his astonishing
And versatile unworth.

Upon the Reservation wide
  We give for his inhabiting
  He goes a-jackass rabbiting
To furnish his inside.

The hopper singing in the grass
  He seizes with avidity:
  He loves its tart acidity,
And gobbles all that pass.

He penetrates the spider's veil,
  Industriously pillages
  The toads' defenseless villages,
And shadows home the snail.

He lightly runs to earth the quaint
  Red worm and, deftly troweling,
  He makes it with his boweling
Familiarly acquaint.

He tracks the pine-nut to its lair,
  Surrounds it with celerity,
  Regards it with asperity--
Smiles, and it isn't there!

I wish he'd open up a grin
  Of adequate vivacity
  And carrying capacity
To take his Agent in.




FAME


He held a book in his knotty paws,
  And its title grand read he:
"The Chronicles of the Kings" it was,
  By the History Companee.
"I'm a monarch," he said
(But a tear he shed)
  "And my picter here you see.

"Great and lasting is my renown,
  However the wits may flout--
As wide almost as this blessed town"
  (But he winced as if with gout).
"I paid 'em like sin
For to put me in,
  But it's O, and O, to be out!"




ONE OF THE REDEEMED


Saint Peter, standing at the Gate, beheld
A soul whose body Death had lately felled.

A pleasant soul as ever was, he seemed:
His step was joyous and his visage beamed.

"Good morning, Peter." There was just a touch
Of foreign accent, but not overmuch.

The Saint bent gravely, like a stately tree,
And said: "You have the advantage, sir, of me."

"Renan of Paris," said the immortal part--
"A master of the literary art.

"I'm somewhat famous, too, I grieve to tell,
As controversialist and infidel."

"That's of no consequence," the Saint replied,
"Why, I myself my Master once denied.

"No one up here cares anything for that.
But is there nothing you were always at?

"It seems to me you were accused one day
Of _something_--what it was I can't just say."

"Quite likely," said the other; "but I swear
My life was irreproachable and fair."

Just then a soul appeared upon the wall,
Singing a hymn as loud as he could bawl.

About his head a golden halo gleamed,
As well befitted one of the redeemed.

A harp he bore and vigorously thumbed,
Strumming he sang, and, singing, ever strummed.

His countenance, suffused with holy pride,
Glowed like a pumpkin with a light inside.

"Ah! that's the chap," said Peter, "who declares:
'Renan's a rake and drunkard--smokes and swears.'

"Yes, that's the fellow--he's a preacher--came
From San Francisco. Mansfield was his name."

"Do you believe him?" said Renan. "Great Scott!
Believe? Believe the blackguard? Of course _not!_

"Just walk right in and make yourself at home.
And if he pecks at you I'll cut his comb.

"He's only here because the Devil swore
He wouldn't have him, for the smile he wore."

Resting his eyes one moment on that proof
Of saving grace, the Frenchman turned aloof,

And stepping down from cloud to cloud, said he:
"Thank you, monsieur,--I'll see if he'll have _me_."




A CRITIC

    [Apparently the Cleveland _Leader_ is not a good judge of
    poetry.--_The Morning Call_.]


That from _you_, neighbor! to whose vacant lot
  Each rhyming literary knacker scourges
His cart-compelling Pegasus to trot,
  As folly, fame or famine smartly urges?

Admonished by the stimulating goad,
  How gaily, lo! the spavined crow-bait prances--
Its cart before it--eager to unload
  The dead-dog sentiments and swill-tub fancies.

Gravely the sweating scavenger pulls out
  The tail-board of his curst imagination,
Shoots all his rascal rubbish, and, no doubt,
  Thanks Fortune for so good a dumping-station.

To improve your property, the vile cascade
  Your thrift invites--to make a higher level.
In vain: with tons of garbage overlaid,
  Your baseless bog sinks slowly to the devil.

"Rubbish may be shot here"--familiar sign!
  I seem to see it in your every column.
You have your wishes, but if I had mine
  'Twould to your editor mean something solemn.




A QUESTION OF ELIGIBILITY


It was a bruised and battered chap
The victim of some dire mishap,
Who sat upon a rock and spent
His breath in this ungay lament:

"Some wars--I've frequent heard of such--
Has beat the everlastin' Dutch!
But never fight was fit by man
To equal this which has began
In our (I'm in it, if you please)
Academy of Sciences.
For there is various gents belong
To it which go persistent wrong,
And loving the debates' delight
Calls one another names at sight.
Their disposition, too, accords
With fighting like they all was lords!
Sech impulses should be withstood:
'Tis scientific to be good.

"'Twas one of them, one night last week,
Rose up his figure for to speak:
'Please, Mr. Chair, I'm holding here
A resolution which, I fear,
Some ancient fossils that has bust
Their cases and shook off their dust
To sit as Members here will find
Unpleasant, not to say unkind.'
And then he read it every word,
And silence fell on all which heard.
That resolution, wild and strange,
Proposed a fundamental change,
Which was that idiots no more
Could join us as they had before!

"No sooner was he seated than
The members rose up, to a man.
Each chap was primed with a reply
And tried to snatch the Chairman's eye.
They stomped and shook their fists in air,
And, O, what words was uttered there!

"The Chair was silent, but at last
He hove up his proportions vast
And stilled them tumults with a look
By which the undauntedest was shook.
He smiled sarcastical and said:
'If Argus was the Chair, instead
Of me, he'd lack enough of eyes
Each orator to recognize!
And since, denied a hearing, you
Might maybe undertake to do
Each other harm before you cease,
I've took some steps to keep the peace:
I've ordered out--alas, alas,
That Science e'er to such a pass
Should come!--I've ordered out--the gas!'

"O if a tongue or pen of fire
Was mine I could not tell entire
What the ensuin' actions was.
When swollered up in darkness' jaws
We fit and fit and fit and fit,
And everything we felt we hit!
We gouged, we scratched and we pulled hair,
And O, what words was uttered there!
And when at last the day dawn came
Three hundred Scientists was lame;
Two hundred others couldn't stand,
They'd been so careless handled, and
One thousand at the very least
Was spread upon the floor deceased!
'Twere easy to exaggerate,
But lies is things I mortal hate.

"Such, friends, is the disaster sad
Which has befel the Cal. Acad.
And now the question is of more
Importance than it was before:
Shall vacancies among us be
To idiots threw open free?"




FLEET STROTHER


What! you were born, you animated doll,
Within the shadow of the Capitol?
'Twas always thought (and Bancroft so assures
His trusting readers) it was reared in yours.




CALIFORNIAN SUMMER PICTURES


THE FOOT-HILL RESORT

Assembled in the parlor
  Of the place of last resort,
The smiler and the snarler
  And the guests of every sort--
    The elocution chap
    With rhetoric on tap;
  The mimic and the funny dog;
  The social sponge; the money-hog;
    Vulgarian and dude;
    And the prude;
  The adiposing dame
  With pimply face aflame;
  The kitten-playful virgin--
    Vergin' on to fifty years;
  The solemn-looking sturgeon
    Of a firm of auctioneers;
  The widower flirtatious;
  The widow all too gracious;
The man with a proboscis and a sepulcher beneath.
One assassin picks the banjo, and another picks his teeth.


AT ANCHOR

The soft asphaltum in the sun;
Betrays a tendency to run;
Whereas the dog that takes his way
Across its course concludes to stay.


THE IN-COMING CLIMATE

Now o' nights the ocean breeze
  Makes the patient flinch,
For that zephyr bears a sneeze
  In every cubic inch.
Lo! the lively population
Chorusing in sternutation
A catarrhal acclamation!


A LONG-FELT WANT

Dimly apparent, through the gloom
Of Market-street's opaque simoom,
A queue of people, parti-sexed,
Awaiting the command of "Next!"
A sidewalk booth, a dingy sign:
"Teeth dusted nice--five cents a shine."


TO THE HAPPY HUNTING GROUNDS

Wide windy reaches of high stubble field;
A long gray road, bordered with dusty pines;
A wagon moving in a "cloud by day."
Two city sportsmen with a dove between,
Breast-high upon a fence and fast asleep--
A solitary dove, the only dove
In twenty counties, and it sick, or else
It were not there. Two guns that fire as one,
With thunder simultaneous and loud;
Two shattered human wrecks of blood and bone!
And later, in the gloaming, comes a man--
The worthy local coroner is he,
Renowned all thereabout, and popular
With many a remain. All tenderly
Compiling in a game-bag the debris,
He glides into the gloom and fades from sight.
The dove, cured of its ailment by the shock,
Has flown, meantime, on pinions strong and fleet,
To die of age in some far foreign land.




SLANDER


FITCH:

"All vices you've exhausted, friend;
  So all the papers say."

PICKERING:

"Ah, what vile calumnies are penned!--
  'Tis just the other way."




JAMES L. FLOOD


As oft it happens in the youth of day
That mists obscure the sun's imperfect ray,
Who, as he's mounting to the dome's extreme,
Smites and dispels them with a steeper beam,
So you the vapors that begirt your birth
Consumed, and manifested all your worth.
But still one early vice obstructs the light
And sullies all the visible and bright
Display of mind and character. You write.




FOUR CANDIDATES FOR SENATOR


To flatter your way to the goad of your hope,
  O plausible Mr. Perkins,
You'll need ten tons of the softest soap
  And butter a thousand firkins.
The soap you could put to a better use
  In washing your hands of ambition
Ere the butter's used for cooking your goose
  To a beautiful brown condition.

                                   

"The Railroad can't run Stanford." That is so--
  The tail can't curl the pig; but then, you know,
Inside the vegetable-garden's pale
  The pig will eat more cabbage than the tail.

                                   

When Sargent struts by all the lawmakers say:
  "Right--left!" It is fair to infer
The right will get left, nor polar the day
  When he makes that thing to occur.

Not so, not so, 'tis a joke, that cry--
  Foolish and dull and small:
He so bores them for votes that they mean to imply
  He's a drill-Sargent, that is all.

                                   

Gods! what a sight! Astride McClure's broad back
Estee jogs round the Senatorial track,
The crowd all undecided, as they pass,
Whether to cheer the man or cheer the ass.
They stop: the man to lower his feet is seen
And the tired beast, withdrawing from between,
Mounts, as they start again, the biped's neck,
And scarce the crowd can say which one's on deck.




A GROWLER


Judge Shafter, you're an aged man, I know,
  And learned too, I doubt not, in the law;
And a head white with many a winter's snow
  (I wish, however that your heart would thaw)
  Claims reverence and honor; but the jaw
That's always wagging with a word malign,
  Nagging and scolding every one in sight
As harshly as a jaybird in a pine,
  And with as little sense of wrong and right
As animates that irritable creature,
Is not a very venerable feature.

You damn all witnesses, all jurors too
  (And swear at the attorneys, I suppose,
But _that's_ commendable) "till all is blue";
  And what it's all about, the good Lord knows,
  Not you; but all the hotter, fiercer glows
Your wrath for that--as dogs the louder howl
  With only moonshine to incite their rage,
And bears with more ferocious menace growl,
  Even when their food is flung into the cage.
Reform, your Honor, and forbear to curse us.
Lest all men, hearing you, cry: "_Ecce ursus_!"




AD MOODIUM


Tut! Moody, do not try to show
  To gentlemen and ladies
That if they have not "Faith," they'll go
    Headlong to Hades.

Faith is belief; and how can I
  Have that by being willing?
This dime I cannot, though I try,
    Believe a shilling.

Perhaps you can. If so, pray do--
  Believe you own it, also.
But what seems evidence to you
    I may not call so.

Heaven knows I'd like the Faith to think
  This little vessel's contents
Are liquid gold. I see 'tis ink
    For writing nonsense.

Minds prone to Faith, however, may
  Come now and then to sorrow:
They put their trust in truth to-day,
    In lies to-morrow.

No doubt the happiness is great
  To think as one would wish to;
But not to swallow every bait,
    As certain fish do.

To think a snake a cord, I hope,
  Would bolden and delight me;
But some day I might think a rope
    Would chase and bite me.

"Curst Reason! Faith forever blest!"
  You're crying all the season.
Well, who decides that Faith is best?
    Why, Mr. Reason.

He's right or wrong; he answers you
  According to your folly,
And says what you have taught him to,
    Like any polly.




AN EPITAPH


Hangman's hands laid in this tomb an
  Imp of Satan's getting, whom an
Ancient legend says that woman
  Never bore--he owed his birth
  To Sin herself. From Hell to Earth
  She brought the brat in secret state
  And laid him at the Golden gate,
And they named him Henry Vrooman.
  While with mortals here he stayed,
  His father frequently he played.
Raised his birth-place and in other
Playful ways begot his mother.




A SPADE

    [The spade that was used to turn the first sod in the
    construction of the Central Pacific Railroad is to be
    exhibited at the New Orleans Exposition.--_Press Telegram_.]


Precursor of our woes, historic spade,
What dismal records burn upon thy blade!
On thee I see the maculating stains
Of passengers' commingled blood and brains.
In this red rust a widow's curse appears,
And here an orphan tarnished thee with tears.
Upon thy handle sanguinary bands
Reveal the clutching of thine owner's hands
When first he wielded thee with vigor brave
To cut a sod and dig a people's grave--
(For they who are debauched are dead and ought,
In God's name, to be hid from sight and thought.)
Within thee, as within a magic glass,
I seem to see a foul procession pass--
Judges with ermine dragging in the mud
And spotted here and there with guiltless blood;
Gold-greedy legislators jingling bribes;
Kept editors and sycophantic scribes;
Liars in swarms and plunderers in tribes;
They fade away before the night's advance,
And fancy figures thee a devil's lance
Gleaming portentous through the misty shade,
While ghosts of murdered virtues shriek about my blade!




THE VAN NESSIAD


From end to end, thine avenue, Van Ness,
Rang with the cries of battle and distress!
Brave lungs were thundering with dreadful sound
And perspiration smoked along the ground!
Sing, heavenly muse, to ears of mortal clay,
The meaning, cause and finish of the fray.

Great Porter Ashe (invoking first the gods,
Who signed their favor with assenting nods
That snapped off half their heads--their necks grown dry
Since last the nectar cup went circling by)
Resolved to build a stable on his lot,
His neighbors fiercely swearing he should not.
Said he: "I build that stable!" "No, you don't,"
Said they. "I can!" "You can't!" "I will!" "You won't!"
"By heaven!" he swore; "not only will I build,
But purchase donkeys till the place is filled!"
"Needless expense," they sneered in tones of ice--
"The owner's self, if lodged there, would suffice."
For three long months the awful war they waged:
With women, women, men with men engaged,
While roaring babes and shrilling poodles raged!

Jove, from Olympus, where he still maintains
His ancient session (with rheumatic pains
Touched by his long exposure) marked the strife,
Interminable but by loss of life;
For malediction soon exhausts the breath--
If not, old age itself is certain death.
Lo! he holds high in heaven the fatal beam;
A golden pan depends from each, extreme;
This feels of Porter's fate the downward stress,
That bears the destiny of all Van Ness.
Alas! the rusted scales, their life all gone,
Deliver judgment neither pro nor con:
The dooms hang level and the war goes on.
With a divine, contemptuous disesteem
Jove dropped the pans and kicked, himself, the beam:
Then, to decide the strife, with ready wit,
The nickel that he did not care for it
Twirled absently, remarking: "See it spin:
Head, Porter loses; tail, the others win."
The conscious nickel, charged with doom, spun round,
Portentously and made a ringing sound,
Then, staggering beneath its load of fate,
Sank rattling, died at last and lay in state.

Jove scanned the disk and then, as is his wont,
Raised his considering orbs, exclaiming: "Front!"
With leisurely alacrity approached
The herald god, to whom his mind he broached:
"In San Francisco two belligerent Powers,
Such as contended round great Ilion's towers,
Fight for a stable, though in either class
There's not a horse, and but a single ass.
Achilles Ashe, with formidable jaw
Assails a Trojan band with fierce hee-haw,
Firing the night with brilliant curses. They
With dark vituperation gloom the day.
Fate, against which nor gods nor men compete,
Decrees their victory and his defeat.
With haste, good Mercury, betake thee hence
And salivate him till he has no sense!"

Sheer downward shot the messenger afar,
Trailing a splendor like a falling star!
With dimming lustre through the air he burned,
Vanished, nor till another sun returned.
The sovereign of the gods superior smiled,
Beaming benignant, fatherly and mild:
"Is Destiny's decree performed, my lad?--
And has he now no sense?" "Ah, sire, he never had."




A FISH COMMISSIONER


Great Joseph D. Redding--illustrious name!--
Considered a fish-horn the trumpet of Fame.
That goddess was angry, and what do you think?
Her trumpet she filled with a gallon of ink,
And all through the Press, with a devilish glee,
She sputtered and spattered the name of J.D.




TO A STRAY DOG


Well, Towser (I'm thinking your name must be Towser),
  You're a decentish puppy as puppy dogs go,
For you never, I'm sure, could have dined upon trowser,
  And your tail's unimpeachably curled just so.

But, dear me! your name--if 'tis yours--is a "poser":
  Its meaning I cannot get anywise at,
When spoken correctly perhaps it is Toser,
  And means one who toses. Max Muller, how's that?

I ne'er was ingenious at all at divining
  A word's prehistorical, primitive state,
Or finding its root, like a mole, by consigning
  Its bloom to the turnep-top's sorrowful fate.

And, now that I think of it well, I'm no nearer
 The riddle's solution than ever--for how's
My pretty invented word, "tose," any clearer
  In point of its signification than "towse"?

So, Towser (or Toser), I mean to rename you
  In honor of some good and eminent man,
In the light and the heat of whose quickening fame you
  May grow to an eminent dog if you can.

In sunshine like his you'll not long be a croucher:
 The Senate shall hear you--for that I will vouch.
Come here, sir. Stand up. I rechristen you Goucher.
 But damn you! I'll shoot you if ever you gouch!




IN HIS HAND


De Young (in Chicago the story is told)
"Took his life in his hand," like a warrior bold,
And stood before Buckley--who thought him behind,
For Buckley, the man-eating monster is blind.
"Count fairly the ballots!" so rang the demand
Of the gallant De Young, with his life in his hand.
'Tis done, and the struggle is ended. No more
He havocs the battle-field, gilt with the gore
Of slain reputations. No more he defies
His "lying opponents" with deadlier lies.
His trumpet is hushed and his belt is unbound--
His enemies' characters cumber the ground.
They bloat on the war-plain with ink all asoak,
The fortunate candidates perching to croak.
No more he will charge, with a daring divine,
His foes with corruption, his friends by the line.
The thunders are stilled of the horrid campaign,
De Young is triumphant, and never again
Will he need, with his life in his hand, to roar:
"Count fair or, by G----, I will die on your floor!"
His life has been spared, for his sins to atone,
And the hand that he took it in washed with cologne.




A DEMAGOGUE


   "Yawp, yawp, yawp!
   Under the moon and sun.
   It's aye the rabble,
   And I to gabble,
And hey! for the tale that is never done.

   "Chant, chant, chant!
To woo the reluctant vote.
   I would I were dead
   And my say were said
And my song were sung to its ultimate note.

   "Stab, stab, stab!
Ah! the weapon between my teeth--
   I'm sick of the flash of it;
   See how the slash of it
Misses the foeman to mangle the sheath!

   "Boom, boom, boom!
I'm beating the mammoth drum.
  My nethermost tripes
  I blow into the pipes--
It's oh! for the honors that never come!"

   'Twas the dolorous blab
   Of a tramping "scab"--
   'Twas the eloquent Swift
   Of the marvelous gift--
The wild, weird, wonderful gift of gab!




IGNIS FATUUS


Weep, weep, each loyal partisan,
  For Buckley, king of hearts;
A most accomplished man; a man
Of parts--of foreign parts.

Long years he ruled with gentle sway,
  Nor grew his glory dim;
And he would be with us to-day
  If we were but with him.

Men wondered at his going off
  In such a sudden way;
'Twas thought, as he had come to scoff
  He would remain to prey.

Since he is gone we're all agreed
  That he is what men call
A crook: his very steps, indeed,
  Are bent--to Montreal.

So let our tears unhindered flow,
  Our sighs and groans have way:
It matters not how much we Oh!--
  The devil is to pay.




FROM TOP TO BOTTOM

    [Japan has 73,759 Buddhist priests, "most of whom," says a
    Christian missionary, "are grossly ignorant, and many of them
    lead scandalous lives."]


O Buddha, had you but foreknown
  The vices of your priesthood
It would have made you twist and moan
  As any wounded beast would.
You would have damned the entire lot
And turned a Christian, would you not?

There were no Christians, I'll allow,
  In your day; that would only
Have brought distinction. Even now
  A Christian might feel lonely.
All take the name, but facts are things
As stubborn as the will of kings.

The priests were ignorant and low
  When ridiculed by Lucian;
The records, could we read, might show
  The same of times Confucian.
And yet the fact I can't disguise
That Deacon Rankin's good and wise.

'Tis true he is not quite a priest,
  Nor more than half a preacher;
But he exhorts as loud at least
  As any living creature.
And when the plate is passed about
He never takes a penny out.

From Buddha down to Rankin! There,--
  I never did intend to.
This pen's a buzzard's quill, I swear,
  Such subjects to descend to.
When from the humming-bird I've wrung
A plume I'll write of Mike de Young.




AN IDLER


Who told Creed Haymond he was witty?--who
Had nothing better in this world to do?
Could no greased pig's appeal to his embrace
Kindle his ardor for the friendly chase?
Did no dead dog upon a vacant lot,
Bloated and bald, or curdled in a clot,
Stir his compassion and inspire his arms
To hide from human eyes its faded charms?

If not to works of piety inclined,
Then recreation might have claimed his mind.
The harmless game that shows the feline greed
To cinch the shorts and make the market bleed[A]
Is better sport than victimizing Creed;
And a far livelier satisfaction comes
Of knowing Simon, autocrat of thumbs.[B]
If neither worthy work nor play command
This gentleman of leisure's heart and hand,
Then Mammon might his idle spirit lift
By hope of profit to some deed of thrift.
Is there no cheese to pare, no flint to skin,
No tin to mend, no glass to be put in,
No housewife worthy of a morning visit,
Her rags and sacks and bottles to solicit?
Lo! the blind sow's precarious pursuit
Of the aspiring oak's familiar fruit!--
'Twould more advantage any man to steal
This easy victim's undefended meal
Than tell Creed Haymond he has wit, and so
Expose the state to his narcotic flow!

[Footnote A: "Pussy Wants a Corner."]

[Footnote B: "Simon Says Thumbs Up."]




THE DEAD KING


Hawaii's King resigned his breath--
  Our Legislature guffawed.
The awful dignity of death
  Not any single rough awed.
But when our Legislators die
All Kings, Queens, Jacks and Aces cry.




A PATTER SONG


There was a cranky Governor--
  His name it wasn't Waterman.
  For office he was hotter than
The love of any lover, nor
Was Boruck's threat of aiding him
Effective in dissuading him--
  This pig-headed, big-headed, singularly self-conceited Governor Nonwaterman.

To citrus fairs, _et caetera_,
  He went about philandering,
  To pride of parish pandering.
He knew not any better--ah,
His early education had
Not taught the abnegation fad--
  The wool-witted, bull-witted, fabulously feeble-minded king of gabble-gandering!

He conjured up, _ad libitum_,
  With postures energetical,
  One day (this is prophetical)
His graces, to exhibit 'em.
He straddled in each attitude,
Four parallels of latitude--
  The slab-footed, crab-footed, galloping gregarian, of presence unaesthetical!
An ancient cow, perceiving that
  His powers of agility
  Transcended her ability
(A circumstance for grieving at)
Upon her horns engrafted him
And to the welkin wafted him--
  The high-rolling, sky-rolling, hurtling hallelujah-lad of peerless volatility!



A CALLER


"Why, Goldenson, you're looking very well."
 Said Death as, strolling through the County Jail,
He entered that serene assassin's cell
  And hung his hat and coat upon a nail.
"I think that life in this secluded spot
Agrees with men of your trade, does it not?"

"Well, yes," said Goldenson, "I can't complain:
  Life anywhere--provided it is mine--
Agrees with me; but I observe with pain
  That still the people murmur and repine.
It hurts their sense of harmony, no doubt,
To see a persecuted man grow stout."

"O no, 'tis not your growing stout," said Death,
  "Which makes these malcontents complain and scold--
They like you to be, somehow, scant of breath.
  What they object to is your growing old.
And--though indifferent to lean or fat--
I don't myself entirely favor _that_."

With brows that met above the orbs beneath,
  And nose that like a soaring hawk appeared,
And lifted lip, uncovering his teeth,
  The Mamikellikiller coldly sneered:
"O, so you don't! Well, how will you assuage
Your spongy passion for the blood of age?"

Death with a clattering convulsion, drew
  His coat on, hatted his unmeated pow,
Unbarred the door and, stepping partly through,
  Turned and made answer: "I will _show_ you how.
I'm going to the Bench you call Supreme
And tap the old women who sit there and dream."




THE SHAFTER SHAFTED


Well, James McMillan Shafter, you're a Judge--
  At least you were when last I knew of you;
And if the people since have made you budge
  I did not notice it. I've much to do
  Without endeavoring to follow, through
The miserable squabbles, dust and smudge,
The fate of even the veteran contenders
Who fight with flying colors and suspenders.
Being a Judge, 'tis natural and wrong
  That you should villify the public press--
Save while you are a candidate. That song
  Is easy quite to sing, and I confess
  It wins applause from hearers who have less
Of spiritual graces than belong
To audiences of another kidney--
Men, for example, like Sir Philip Sidney.

Newspapers, so you say, don't always treat
  The Judges with respect. That may be so
And still no harm done, for I swear I'll eat
  My legs and in the long hereafter go,
  Snake-like, upon my belly if you'll show
All Judges are respectable and sweet.
For some of them are rogues and the world's laughter's
Directed at some others, for they're Shafters.




THE MUMMERY




THE TWO CAVEES


DRAMATIS PERSONAE.

FITCH                              _a Pelter of Railrogues_
PICKERING                    _his Partner, an Enemy to Sin_
OLD NICK                            _a General Blackwasher_
DEAD CAT                                        _a Missile_
ANTIQUE EGG                                       _Another_
RAILROGUES, DUMP-CARTERS. NAVVIES and Unassorted SHOVELRY in the Lower Distance

_Scene_--The Brink of a Railway Cut, a Mile Deep.

_Time_--1875.


FITCH:

Gods! what a steep declivity! Below
I see the lazy dump-carts come and go,
Creeping like beetles and about as big.
The delving Paddies--

PICKERING:

              Case of _infra dig._

FITCH:

Loring, light-minded and unmeaning quips
Come with but scant propriety from lips
Fringed with the blue-black evidence of age.
'Twere well to cultivate a style more sage,
For men will fancy, hearing how you pun,
Our foulest missiles are but thrown in fun.

                        (_Enter Dead Cat._)

Here's one that thoughtfully has come to hand;
Slant your fine eye below and see it land.
  (_Seizes Dead Cat by the tail and swings it in act to throw._)

DEAD CAT (_singing_):

Merrily, merrily, round I go--
  Over and under and at.
Swing wide and free, swing high and low
  The anti-monopoly cat!

O, who wouldn't be in the place of me,
  The anti-monopoly cat?
    Designed to admonish,
    Persuade and astonish
The capitalist and--

FITCH _(letting go):_

                  Scat!
                         _(Exit Dead Cat.)_


PICKERING:

Huzza! good Deacon, well and truly flung!
Pat Stanford it has grassed, and Mike de Young.
Mike drives a dump-cart for the villains, though
'Twere fitter that he pull it. Well, we owe
The traitor one for leaving us!--some day
We'll get, if not his place, his cart away.
Meantime fling missiles--any kind will do.
                                _(Enter Antique Egg.)_
Ha! we can give them an _ovation_, too!

ANTIQUE EGG:

    In the valley of the Nile,
    Where the Holy Crocodile
    Of immeasurable smile
    Blossoms like the early rose,
    And the Sacred Onion grows--
    When the Pyramids were new
    And the Sphinx possessed a nose,
    By a storkess I was laid
    In the cool papyrus shade,
    Where the rushes later grew,
    That concealed the little Jew,
          Baby Mose.

    Straining very hard to hatch,
    I disrupted there my yolk;
    And I felt my yellow streaming
          Through my white;
    And the dream that I was dreaming
    Of posterity was broke
          In a night.
    Then from the papyrus-patch
    By the rising waters rolled,
    Passing many a temple old,
    I proceeded to the sea.
    Memnon sang, one morn, to me,
    And I heard Cambyses sass
    The tomb of Ozymandias!

FITCH:

O, venerablest orb of all the earth,
God rest the lady fowl that gave thee birth!
Fit missile for the vilest hand to throw--
I freely tender thee mine own. Although
As a bad egg I am myself no slouch,
Thy riper years thy ranker worth avouch.
Now, Pickering, please expose your eye and say
If--whoop!--
                                        _(Exit egg.)_
             I've got the range.

PICKERING:
                                 Hooray! hooray!
A grand good shot, and Teddy Colton's down:
It burst in thunderbolts upon his crown!
Larry O'Crocker drops his pick and flies,
And deafening odors scream along the skies!
Pelt 'em some more.

FITCH:

                 There's nothing left but tar--
wish I were a Yahoo.

PICKERING:

                   Well, you are.
But keep the tar. How well I recollect,
When Mike was in with us--proud, strong, erect--
_Mens conscia recti_--flinging mud, he stood,
Austerely brave, incomparably good,
Ere yet for filthy lucre he began
To drive a cart as Stanford's hired man,
That pitch-pot bearing in his hand, Old Nick
Appeared and tarred us all with the same stick.
                           _(Enter Old Nick)_.
I hope he won't return and use his arts
To make us part with our immortal parts.

OLD NICK:

Make yourself easy on that score my lamb;
For both your souls I wouldn't give a damn!
I want my tar-pot--hello! where's the stick?

FITCH:

Don't look at _me_ that fashion!--look at Pick.

PICKERING:

Forgive me, father--pity my remorse!
Truth is--Mike took that stick to spank his horse.
It fills my pericardium with grief
That I kept company with such a thief.

(_Endeavoring to get his handkerchief, he opens his coat and
the tar-stick falls out. Nick picks it up, looks at the culprit
reproachfully and withdraws in tears._)

FITCH (_excitedly_):

O Pickering, come hither to the brink--
There's something going on down there, I think!
With many an upward smile and meaning wink
The navvies all are running from the cut
Like lunatics, to right and left--

PICKERING:
                                   Tut, tut--
'Tis only some poor sport or boisterous joke.
Let us sit down and have a quiet smoke.
                         (_They sit and light cigars._)

      FITCH (_singing_):

    When first I met Miss Toughie
      I smoked a fine cigyar,
    An' I was on de dummy
      And she was in de cyar.

      BOTH (_singing_):

    An' I was on de dummy
      And she was in de cyar.

      FITCH (_singing_):

    I couldn't go to her,
      An' she wouldn't come to me;
    An' I was as oneasy
      As a gander on a tree.

      BOTH (_singing_):

    An' I was as oneasy
      As a gander on a tree.

      FITCH (_singing_):

    But purty soon I weakened
      An' lef' de dummy's bench,
    An' frew away a ten-cent weed
      To win a five-cent wench!

      BOTH (_singing_)

    An' frew away a ten-cent weed
      To win a five-cent wench!

FITCH:

Is there not now a certain substance sold
Under the name of fulminate of gold,
A high explosive, popular for blasting,
Producing an effect immense and lasting?

PICKERING:

Nay, that's mere superstition. Rocks are rent
And excavations made by argument.
Explosives all have had their day and season;
The modern engineer relies on reason.
He'll talk a tunnel through a mountain's flank
And by fair speech cave down the tallest bank.

(_The earth trembles, a deep subterranean explosion is heard
and a section of the bank as big as El Capitan starts away and
plunges thunderously into the cut. A part of it strikes De
Young's dumpcart abaft the axletree and flings him, hurtling,
skyward, a thing of legs and arms, to descend on the distant
mountains, where it is cold. Fitch and Pickering pull themselves
out of the debris and stand ungraveling their eyes and
noses._)

FITCH:

Well, since I'm down here I will help to grade,
And do dirt-throwing henceforth with a spade.

PICKERING:

God bless my soul! it gave me quit a start.
Well, fate is fate--I guess I'll drive this cart.
               (_Curtain._)




METEMPSYCHOSIS


DRAMATIS PERSONAE.

ST. JOHN                        _a Presidential Candidate_
MCDONALD                             _a Defeated Aspirant_
MRS. HAYES                               _an Ex-President_
PITTS-STEVENS                              _a Water Nymph_

_Scene_--A Small Lake in the Alleghany Mountains.

ST. JOHN:

Hours I've immersed my muzzle in this tarn
And, quaffing copious potations, tried
To suck it dry; but ever as I pumped
Its waters into my distended skin
The labor of my zeal extruded them
In perspiration from my pores; and so,
Rilling the marginal declivity,
They fell again into their source. Ah, me!
Could I but find within these ancient hills
Some long extinct volcano, by the rains
Of countless ages in its crater brimmed
Like a full goblet, I would lay me down
Prone on the outer slope, and o'er its edge
Arching my neck, I'd siphon out its store
And flood the valleys with my sweat for aye.
So should I be accounted as a god,
Even as Father Nilus is. What's that?
Methought I heard some sawyer draw his file
With jarring, stridulous cacophany
Across his notchy blade, to set its teeth
And mine on edge. Ha! there it goes again!

_Song, within_.

  Cold water's the milk of the mountains,
    And Nature's our wet-nurse. O then,
  Glue thou thy blue lips to her fountains
    Forever and ever, amen!

ST. JOHN:

Why surely there's congenial company
Aloof--the spirit, I suppose, that guards
This sacred spot; perchance some water-nymph
Who laving in the crystal flood her limbs
Has taken cold, and so, with raucous voice
Afflicts the sensitive membrane of mine ear
The while she sings my sentiments.
                     _(Enter Pitts-Stevens.)_
                                    Hello!
What fiend is this?

PITTS-STEVENS:

'Tis I, be not afraid.

ST. JOHN:

And who, thou antiquated crone, art thou?
I ne'er forget a face, but names I can't
So well remember. I have seen thee oft.
When in the middle season of the night,
Curved with a cucumber, or knotted hard
With an eclectic pie, I've striven to keep
My head and heels asunder, thou has come,
With sociable familiarity,
Into my dream, but not, alas, to bless.

PITTS-STEVENS:

My name's Pitts-Stevens, age just seventeen years;
Talking teetotaler, professional
Beauty.

ST. JOHN:

What dost them here?

PITTS-STEVENS:

I'm come, fair sir,
With paint and brush to blazon on these rocks
The merits of my master's nostrum--so:
                                _(Paints rapidly.)_
"McDonald's Vinegar Bitters!"

ST. JOHN:

What are they?

PITTS-STEVENS:

A woman suffering from widowhood
Took a full bottle and was cured. A man
There was--a murderer; the doctors all
Had given him up--he'd but an hour to live.
He swallowed half a glassful. He is dead,
But not of Vinegar Bitters. A wee babe
Lay sick and cried for it. The mother gave
That innocent a spoonful and it smoothed
Its pathway to the tomb. 'Tis warranted
To cause a boy to strike his father, make
A pig squeal, start the hair upon a stone,
Or play the fiddle for a country dance.
_(Enter McDonald, reading a Sunday-school book.)_
Good morrow, sir; I trust you're well.

MCDONALD:

H'lo, Pitts!
Observe, good friends, I have a volume here
Myself am author of--a noble book
To train the infant mind (delightful task!)
It tells how one Samantha Brown, age, six,
A gutter-bunking slave to rum, was saved
By Vinegar Bitters, went to church and now
Has an account at the Pacific Bank.
I'll read the whole work to you.

ST JOHN:
                                Heaven forbid!
I've elsewhere an engagement.

PITTS-STEVENS:
                             I am deaf.

MCDONALD _(reading regardless):_

"Once on a time there lived"----

_(Enter Mrs. Hayes.)_
                                Behold our queen!

ALL:

Her eyes upon the ground
  Before her feet she low'rs,
Walking, in thought profound,
  As 'twere, upon all fours.
Her visage is austere,
  Her gait a high parade;
At every step you hear
  The sloshing lemonade!

MRS. HAYES _(to herself):_

Once, sitting in the White House, hard at work
Signing State papers (Rutherford was there,
Knitting some hose) a sudden glory fell
Upon my paper. I looked up and saw
An angel, holding in his hand a rod
Wherewith he struck me. Smarting with the blow
I rose and (cuffing Rutherford) inquired:
"Wherefore this chastisement?" The angel said:
"Four years you have been President, and still
There's rum!"--then flew to Heaven. Contrite, I swore
Such oath as lady Methodist might take,
My second term should medicine my first.
The people would not have it that way; so
I seek some candidate who'll take my soul--
My spirit of reform, fresh from my breast,
And give me his instead; and thus equipped
With my imperious and fiery essence,
Drive the Drink-Demon from the land and fill
The people up with water till their teeth
Are all afloat.

                    (_St. John discovers himself_.)
          What, _you_?

ST. JOHN:

                    Aye, Madam, I'll
Swap souls with you and lead the cold sea-green
Amphibians of Prohibition on,
Pallid of nose and webbed of foot, swim-bladdered,
Gifted with gills, invincible!

MRS. HAYES:

                    Enough,
Stand forth and consummate the interchange.

(_While McDonald and Pitts-Stevens modestly turn their
backs, the latter blushing a delicate shrimp-pink, St. John and
Mrs. Hayes effect an exchange of immortal parts. When the
transfer is complete McDonald turns and advances, uncorking
a bottle of Vinegar Bitters_.)

MCDONALD (_chanting_):

    Nectar compounded of simples
      Cocted in Stygian shades--
    Acids of wrinkles and pimples
      From faces of ancient maids--
    Acrid precipitates sunken
      From tempers of scolding wives
    Whose husbands, uncommonly drunken,
      Are commonly found in dives,--
    With this I baptize and appoint thee
                                        (_to St. John_.)
      To marshal the vinophobe ranks.
    In the name of Dambosh I anoint thee
                   (_pours the liquid down St. John's back_.)
      As King of aquatical cranks!

(_The liquid blisters the royal back, and His Majesty starts
on a dead run, energetically exclaiming. Exit St. John_.)

MRS. HAYES:

My soul! My soul! I'll never get it back
Unless I follow nimbly on his track.
                                  (_Exit Mrs. Hayes_.)

PITTS-STEVENS:

O my! he's such a beautiful young man!
I'll follow, too, and catch him if I can.
                                     (_Exit Pitts-Stevens_.)

MCDONALD:

He scarce is visible, his dust so great!
Methinks for so obscure a candidate
He runs quite well. But as for Prohibition--
I mean myself to hold the first position.

(_Produces a pocket flask, topes a cruel quantity of double-distilled
thunder-and-lightning out of it, smiles so grimly as to
darken all the stage and sings_):

    Though fortunes vary let all be merry,
      And then if e'er a disaster befall,
    At Styx's ferry is Charon's wherry
            In easy call.

    Upon a ripple of golden tipple
      That tipsy ship'll convey you best.
    To king and cripple, the bottle's the nipple
            Of Nature's breast!

                (_Curtain_.)




SLICKENS


DRAMATIS PERSONAE.

HAYSEED                                          _a Granger_
NOZZLE                                             _a Miner_
RINGDIVVY                                      _a Statesman_
FEEGOBBLE                                         _a Lawyer_
JUNKET                                         _a Committee_

_Scene_--Yuba Dam.

_Feegobble, Ringdivvy, Nozzle_.


NOZZLE:

My friends, since '51 I have pursued
The evil tenor of my watery way,
Removing hills as by an act of faith--

RINGDIVVY:

Just so; the steadfast faith of those who hold,
In foreign lands beyond the Eastern sea,
The shares in your concern--a simple, blind,
Unreasoning belief in dividends,
Still stimulated by assessments which,
When the skies fall, ensnaring all the larks,
Will bring, no doubt, a very great return.

ALL (_singing_):

        O the beautiful assessment,
        The exquisite assessment,
        The regular assessment,
          That makes the water flow.

RINGDIVVY:

        The rascally-assessment!

FEEGOBBLE:

        The murderous assessment!

NOZZLE:

        The glorious assessment
          That makes my mare to go!

FEEGOBBLE:

But, Nozzle, you, I think, were on the point
Of making a remark about some rights--
Some certain vested rights you have acquired
By long immunity; for still the law
Holds that if one do evil undisturbed
His right to do so ripens with the years;
And one may be a villain long enough
To make himself an honest gentleman.

ALL (_singing_):

        Hail, holy law,
        The soul with awe
          Bows to thy dispensation.

NOZZLE:

        It breaks my jaw!

RINGDIVVY:

        It qualms my maw!

FEEGOBBLE:

        It feeds my jaw,
        It crams my maw,
          It is my soul's salvation!

NOZZLE:

Why, yes, I've floated mountains to the sea
For lo! these many years; though some, they say,
Do strand themselves along the bottom lands
And cover up a village here and there,
And here and there a ranch. 'Tis said, indeed,
The granger with his female and his young
Do not infrequently go to the dickens
By premature burial in slickens.

ALL (_singing_):

        Could slickens forever
        Choke up the river,
        And slime's endeavor
          Be tried on grain,
        How small the measure
        Of granger's treasure,
          How keen his pain!

RINGDIVVY:

"A consummation devoutly to be wished!"
These rascal grangers would long since have been
Submerged in slimes, to the last man of them,
But for the fact that all their wicked tribes
Affect our legislation with their bribes.

ALL (_singing_):

        O bribery's great--
        'Tis a pillar of State,
          And the people they are free.

FEEGOBBLE:

        It smashes my slate!

NOZZLE:

        It is thievery straight!

RINGDIVVY:

        But it's been the making of me!

NOZZLE:

I judge by certain shrewd sensations here
In these callosities I call my thumbs--
thrilling sense as of ten thousand pins,
Red-hot and penetrant, transpiercing all
The cuticle and tickling through the nerves--
That some malign and awful thing draws near.

                                   (_Enter Hayseed._)

Good Lord! here are the ghosts and spooks of all
The grangers I have decently interred,
Rolled into one!

FEEGOBBLE:

                Plead, phantom.

RINGDIVVY:

                                   You've the floor.

HAYSEED:

      From the margin of the river
      (Bitter Creek, they sometimes call it)
      Where I cherished once the pumpkin,
      And the summer squash promoted,
      Harvested the sweet potato,
      Dallied with the fatal melon
      And subdued the fierce cucumber,
      I've been driven by the slickens,
      Driven by the slimes and tailings!
      All my family--my Polly
      Ann and all my sons and daughters,
      Dog and baby both included--
      All were swamped in seas of slickens,
      Buried fifty fathoms under,
      Where they lie, prepared to play their
      Gentle prank on geologic
      Gents that shall exhume them later,
      In the dim and distant future,
      Taking them for melancholy
      Relics antedating Adam.
      I alone got up and dusted.

NOZZLE:

Avaunt! you horrid and infernal cuss!
What dire distress have you prepared for us?

RINGDIVVY:

    Were I a buzzard stooping from the sky
      My craw with filth to fill,
    Into your honorable body I
      Would introduce a bill.

FEEGOBBLE:

Defendant, hence, or, by the gods, I'll brain thee!--
Unless you saved some turneps to retain me.

HAYSEED:

As I was saying, I got up and dusted,
My ranch a graveyard and my business busted!
But hearing that a fellow from the City,
Who calls himself a Citizens' Committee,
Was coming up to play the very dickens,
With those who cover up our farms with slickens,
And make himself--unless I am in error--
To all such miscreants a holy terror,
I thought if I would join the dialogue
I maybe might get payment for my dog.

ALL (_Singing_):

O the dog is the head of Creation,
  Prime work of the Master's hand;
He hasn't a known occupation,
  Yet lives on the fat of the land.
Adipose, indolent, sleek and orbicular,
Sun-soaken, door matted, cross and particular,
Men, women, children, all coddle and wait on him,
Then, accidentally shutting the gate on him,
Miss from their calves, ever after, the rifted out
Mouthful of tendons that doggy has lifted out!
                              (_Enter Junket_.)

JUNKET:

Well met, my hearties! I must trouble you
Jointly and severally to provide
A comfortable carriage, with relays
Of hardy horses. This Committee means
To move in state about the country here.
I shall expect at every place I stop
Good beds, of course, and everything that's nice,
With bountiful repast of meat and wine.
For this Committee comes to sea and mark
And inwardly digest.

HAYSEED:

                   Digest my dog!

NOZZLE:

First square my claim for damages: the gold
Escaping with the slickens keeps me poor!

RINGDIVVY:

I merely would remark that if you'd grease
My itching palm it would more glibly glide
Into the public pocket.

FEEGOBBLE:

                   Sir, the wheels
Of justice move but slowly till they're oiled.
I have some certain writs and warrants here,
Prepared against your advent. You recall
The tale of Zaccheus, who did climb a tree,
And Jesus said: "Come down"?

JUNKET:

                   Why, bless your souls!
I've got no money; I but came to see
What all this noisy babble is about,
Make a report and file the same away.

NOZZLE, RINGDIVVY, FEEGOBBLE, HAYSEED:

How'll that help _us_? Reports are not our style
Of provender!

JUNKET:

                   Well, you can gnaw the file.

                    (_Curtain._)




"PEACEABLE EXPULSION"


DRAMATIS PERSONAE.

MOUNTWAVE                _a Politician_
HARDHAND                 _a Workingman_
TOK BAK                    _a Chinaman_
SATAN           _a Friend to Mountwave_

CHORUS OF FOREIGN VOTERS.


MOUNTWAVE:

My friend, I beg that you will lend your ears
(I know 'tis asking a good deal of you)
While I for your instruction nominate
Some certain wrongs you suffer. Men like you
Imperfectly are sensible of all
The miseries they actually feel.
Hence, Providence has prudently raised up
Clear-sighted men like me to diagnose
Their cases and inform them where they're hurt.
The wounds of honest workingmen I've made
A specialty, and probing them's my trade.

HARDHAND:

Well, Mister, s'pose you let yer bossest eye
Camp on my mortal part awhile; then you
Jes' toot my sufferin's an' tell me what's
The fashionable caper now in writhes--
The very swellest wiggle.

MOUNTWAVE:

                               Well, my lad,
'Tis plain as is the long, conspicuous nose
Borne, ponderous and pendulous, between
The elephant's remarkable eye-teeth
                                   (_Enter Tok Bak._)
That Chinese competition's what ails _you_.

BOTH (_Singing_):

            O pig-tail Celestial,
            O barbarous bestial,
              Abominable Chinee!
            Simian fellow man,
            Primitive yellow man,
              Joshian devotee!
            Shoe-and-cigar machine,
            Oleomargarine
              You are, and butter are we--
            Fat of the land are we,
              Salt of the earth;
            In God's image planned to be--
              Noble in birth!
            You, on the contrary,
            Modeled upon very
              Different lines indeed,
            Show in conspicuous,
            Base and ridiculous
              Ways your inferior breed.
            Wretched apology,
            Shame of ethnology,
              Monster unspeakably low!
            Fit to be buckshotted--
            Be you 'steboycotted.
              Vanish--vamoose--mosy--Go!

TOK BAK:

You listen me! You beatee the big dlum
An' tell me go to Flowly Kingdom Come.
You all too muchee fool. You chinnee heap.
Such talkee like my washee--belly cheap!
                          (_Enter Satan._)
You dlive me outee clunty towns all way;
Why you no tackle me Safflisco, hay?

SATAN:

Methought I heard a murmuring of tongues
Sound through the ceiling of the hollow earth,
As if the anti-coolie ques----ha! friends,
Well met. You see I keep my ancient word:
Where two or three are gathered in my name,
There am I in their midst.

MOUNTWAVE:

                           O monstrous thief!
To quote the words of Shakespeare as your own.
I know his work.

HARDHAND:

                 Who's Shakespeare?--what's his trade?
I've heard about the work o' that galoot
Till I'm jest sick!

TOK BAK:

                    Go Sunny school--you'll know
Mo' Bible. Bime by pleach--hell-talkee. Tell
'Bout Abel--mebby so he live too cheap.
He mebby all time dig on lanch--no dlink,
No splee--no go plocession fo' make vote--
No sendee money out of clunty fo'
To helpee Ilishmen. Cain killum. Josh
He catchee at it, an' he belly mad--
Say: "Allee Melicans boycottee Cain."
Not muchee--you no pleachee that:
You all same lie.

MOUNTWAVE:

                   This cuss must be expelled.
                                   (_Draws pistol_.)

MOUNTWAVE, HARDHAND, SATAN (_singing_):

    For Chinese expulsion, hurrah!
      To mobbing and murder, all hail!
    Away with your justice and law--
      We'll make every pagan turn tail.

CHORUS OF FOREIGN VOTERS:

    Bedad! oof dot tief o'ze vorld--
    Zat Ivan Tchanay vos got hurled
    In Hella, da debil he say:
   "Wor be yer return pairmit, hey?"
    Und gry as 'e shaka da boot:
   "Zis haythen haf nevaire been oot!"

HARDHAND:

Too many cooks are working at this broth--
I think, by thunder, t'will be mostly froth!
I'm cussed ef I can sarvy, up to date,
What good this dern fandango does the State.

MOUNTWAVE:

The State's advantage, sir, you may not see,
But think how good it is for me.

SATAN:

                                And me.

                 (_Curtain_.)




ASPIRANTS THREE


DRAMATIS PERSONAE.

_QUICK_:
     DE YOUNG      _a Brother to Mushrooms_

_DEAD_:
     SWIFT                    _an Heirloom_
     ESTEE                        _a Relic_

_IMMORTALS_:
     THE SPIRIT OF BROKEN HOPES. THE AUTHOR.

_MISCELLANEOUS_:
     A TROUPE OF COFFINS. THE MOON. VARIOUS COLORED FIRES.


_Scene_--The Political Graveyard at Bone Mountain.


DE YOUNG:

This is the spot agreed upon. Here rest
The sainted statesman who upon the field
Of honor have at various times laid down
Their own, and ended, ignominious,
Their lives political. About me, lo!
Their silent headstones, gilded by the moon,
Half-full and near her setting--midnight. Hark!
Through the white mists of this portentous night
(Which throng in moving shapes about my way,
As they were ghosts of candidates I've slain,
To fray their murderer) my open ear,
Spacious to maw the noises of the world,
Engulfs a footstep.
             (_Enter Estee from his tomb._)
                    Ah, 'tis he, my foe,
True to appointment; and so here we fight--
Though truly 'twas my firm belief that he
Would send regrets, or I had not been here.

ESTEE:

O moon that hast so oft surprised the deeds
Whereby I rose to greatness!--tricksy orb,
The type and symbol of my politics,
Now draw my ebbing fortunes to their flood,
As, by the magic of a poultice, boils
That burn ambitions with defeated fires
Are lifted into eminence.
                         (_Sees De Young._)
                         What? you!
Faith, if I had suspected you would come
From the fair world of politics wherein
So lately you were whelped, and which, alas,
I vainly to revisit strive, though still
Rapped on the rotting head and bidden sleep
Till Resurrection's morn,--if I had thought
You would accept the challenge that I flung
I would have seen you damned ere I came forth
In the night air, shroud-clad and shivering,
To fight so mean a thing! But since you're here,
Draw and defend yourself. By gad, we'll _see_
Who'll be Postmaster-General!

DE YOUNG:

                              We will--
I'll fight (for I am lame) with any blue
And redolent remain that dares aspire
To wreck the Grand Old Grandson's cabinet.
Here's at you, nosegay!

(_They draw tongues and are about to fight, when from an
adjacent whited sepulcher, enter Swift._)

SWIFT:

                Hold! put up your tongues!
Within the confines of this sacred spot
Broods such a holy calm as none may break
By clash of weapons, without sacrilege.
          (_Beats down their tongues with a bone._)
Madmen! what profits it? For though you fought
With such heroic skill that both survived,
Yet neither should achieve the prize, for I
Would wrest it from him. Let us not contend,
But friendliwise by stipulation fix
A slate for mutual advantage. Why,
Having the pick and choice of seats, should we
Forego them all but one? Nay, we'll take three,
And part them so among us that to each
Shall fall the fittest to his powers. In brief,
Let us establish a Portfolio Trust.

ESTEE:

                                    Agreed.

DE YOUNG:

                Aye, truly, 'tis a greed--and one
The offices imperfectly will sate,
But I'll stand in.

SWIFT:

                   Well, so 'tis understood,
As you're the junior member of the Trust,
Politically younger and undead,
Speak, Michael: what portfolio do you choose?

DE YOUNG:

I've thought the Postal service best would serve
My interest; but since I have my pick,
I'll take the War Department. It is known
Throughout the world, from Market street to Pine,
(For a Chicago journal told the tale)
How in this hand I lately took my life
And marched against great Buckley, thundering
My mandate that he count the ballots fair!
Earth heard and shrank to half her size! Yon moon,
Which rivaled then a liver's whiteness, paused
That night at Butchertown and daubed her face
With sheep's blood! Then my serried rank I drew
Back to my stronghold without loss. To mark
My care in saving human life and limb,
The Peace Society bestowed on me
Its leather medal and the title, too,
Of Colonel. Yes, my genius is for war. Good land!
I naturally dote on a brass band!

                     (_Sings._)

O, give me a life on the tented field,
  Where the cannon roar and ring,
Where the flag floats free and the foemen yield
  And bleed as the bullets sing.
But be it not mine to wage the fray
Where matters are ordered the other way,
  For that is a different thing.

O, give me a life in the fierce campaign--
  Let it be the life of my foe:
I'd rather fall upon him than the plain;
  That service I'd fain forego.
O, a warrior's life is fine and free,
But a warrior's death--ah me! ah me!
  That's a different thing, you know.

ESTEE:

Some claim I might myself advance to that
Portfolio. When Rebellion raised its head,
And you, my friends, stayed meekly in your shirts,
I marched with banners to the party stump,
Spat on my hands, made faces fierce as death,
Shook my two fists at once and introduced
Brave resolutions terrible to read!
Nay, only recently, as you do know,
I conquered Treason by the word of mouth,
And slew, with Samson's weapon, the whole South!

SWIFT:

You once fought Stanford, too.

ESTEE:

                              Enough of that--
Give me the Interior and I'll devote
My mind to agriculture and improve
The breed of cabbages, especially
The _Brassica Celeritatis_, named
For _you_ because in days of long ago
You sold it at your market stall,--and, faith,
'Tis said you were an honest huckster then.
I'll be Attorney-General if you
Prefer; for know I am a lawyer too!

SWIFT:

I never have heard that!--did you, De Young?

DE YOUNG:

Never, so help me! And I swear I've heard
A score of Judges say that he is not.

SWIFT (_to Estee_):

You take the Interior. I might aspire
To military station too, for once
I led my party into Pixley's camp,
And he paroled me. I defended, too,
The State of Oregon against the sharp
And bloody tooth of the Australian sheep.
But I've an aptitude exceeding neat
For bloodless battles of diplomacy.
My cobweb treaty of Exclusion once,
Through which a hundred thousand coolies sailed,
Was much admired, but most by Colonel Bee.
Though born a tinker I'm a diplomat
From old Missouri, and I--ha! what's that?

(_Exit Moon. Enter Blue Lights on all the tombs, and a
circle of Red Fire on the grass; in the center the Spirit of
Broken Hopes, and round about, a Troupe of Coffins, dancing
and singing._)

CHORUS OF COFFINS:

        Two bodies dead and one alive--
          Yo, ho, merrily all!
        Now for boodle strain and strive--
          Buzzards all a-warble, O!
        Prophets three, agape for bread;
        Raven with a stone instead--
          Providential raven!
        Judges two and Colonel one--
        Run, run, rustics, run!
        But it's O, the pig is shaven,
          And oily, oily all!

(_Exeunt Coffins, dancing. The Spirit of Broken Hopes
advances, solemnly pointing at each of the Three Worthies in
turn._)

SPIRIT OF BROKEN HOPES:

      Governor, Governor, editor man,
Rusty, musty, spick-and-span,
Harlequin, harridan, dicky-dout,
Demagogue, charlatan--o, u, t, OUT!
                    (_De Young falls and sleeps._)

    Antimonopoler, diplomat,
    Railroad lackey, political rat,
    One, two, three--SCAT!
                    (_Swift falls and sleeps._)

Boycotting chin-worker, working to woo
Fortune, the fickle, to smile upon _you_,
Jo-coated acrobat, shuttle-cock--SHOO!
                    (_Estee falls and sleeps._)

    Now they lie in slumber sweet,
    Now the charm is all complete,
    Hasten I with flying feet
    Where beyond the further sea
    A babe upon its mother's knee
    Is gazing into skies afar
    And crying for a golden star.
    I'll drag a cloud across the blue
    And break that infant's heart in two!

(_Exeunt the Spirit of Broken Hopes and the Red and Blue
Fires. Re-enter Moon._)

ESTEE (_waking_):

Why, this is strange! I dreamed I know not what,
It seemed that certain apparitions were,
Which sang uncanny words, significant
And yet ambiguous--half-understood--
Portending evil; and an awful spook,
Even as I stood with my accomplices,
Counted me out, as children do in play.
Is that you, Mike?

DE YOUNG _(waking):_

It was.

SWIFT _(waking):_

                   Am I all that?
Then I'll reform my ways.
_(Reforms his ways.)_
Ah! had I known
How sweet it is to be an honest man
I never would have stooped to turn my coat
For public favor, as chameleons take
The hue (as near as they can judge) of that
Supporting them. Henceforth I'll buy
With money all the offices I need,
And know the pleasure of an honest life,
Or stay forever in this dismal place.
Now that I'm good, it will no longer do
To make a third with such, a wicked two.
_(Returns to his tomb.)_

DE YOUNG:

Prophetic dream! by some good angel sent
To make me with a quiet life content.
The question shall no more my bosom irk,
To go to Washington or go to work.
From Fame's debasing struggle I'll withdraw,
And taking up the pen lay down the law.
I'll leave this rogue, lest my example make
An honest man of him--his heart would break.
_(Exit De Young.)_

ESTEE:

Out of my company these converts flee,
But that advantage is denied to me:
My curst identity's confining skin
Nor lets me out nor tolerates me in.
Well, since my hopes eternally have fled,
And, dead before, I'm more than ever dead,
To find a grander tomb be now my task,
And pack my pork into a stolen cask.
_(Exit, searching. Loud calls for the Author, who appears,
bowing and smiling_.)

AUTHOR _(singing):_

Jack Satan's the greatest of gods,
  And Hell is the best of abodes.
'Tis reached, through the Valley of Clods,
  By seventy different roads.
  Hurrah for the Seventy Roads!
Hurrah for the clods that resound
With a hollow, thundering sound!
  Hurrah for the Best of Abodes!

We'll serve him as long as we've breath--
  Jack Satan the greatest of gods.
To all of his enemies, death!--
  A home in the Valley of Clods.
  Hurrah for the thunder of clods
That smother the soul of his foe!
Hurrah for the spirits that go
  To dwell with the Greatest of Gods;

_(Curtain falls to faint odor of mortality. Exit the Gas_.)




THE BIRTH OF THE RAIL

DRAMATIS PERSONAE

LELAND, THE KID              _a Road Agent_
COWBOY CHARLEY       _Same Line of Business_
HAPPY HUNTY          _Ditto in All Respects_
SOOTYMUG                           _a Devil_

_Scene_--the Dutch Flat Stage Road, at 12 P.M., on a Night
of 1864.


COWBOY CHARLEY:

My boss, I fear she is delayed to-night.
Already it is past the hour, and yet
My ears have reached no sound of wheels; no note
Melodious, of long, luxurious oaths
Betokens the traditional dispute
(Unsettled from the dawn of time) between
The driver and off wheeler; no clear chant
Nor carol of Wells Fargo's messenger
Unbosoming his soul upon the air--
his prowess to the tender-foot,
And how at divers times in sundry ways
He strewed the roadside with our carcasses.
Clearly, the stage will not come by to-night.

LELAND, THE KID:

I now remember that but yesterday
I saw three ugly looking fellows start
From Colfax with a gun apiece, and they
Did seem on business of importance bent.
Furtively casting all their eyes about
And covering their tracks with all the care
That business men do use. I think perhaps
They were Directors of that rival line,
The great Pacific Mail. If so, they have
Indubitably taken in that coach,
And we are overreached. Three times before
This thing has happened, and if once again
These outside operators dare to cut
Our rates of profit I shall quit the road
And take my money out of this concern.
When robbery no longer pays expense
It loses then its chiefest charm for me,
And I prefer to cheat--you hear me shout!

HAPPY HUNTY:

My chief, you do but echo back my thoughts:
This competition is the death of trade.
'Tis plain (unless we wish to go to work)
Some other business we must early find.
What shall it be? The field of usefulness
Is yearly narrowing with the advance
Of wealth and population on this coast.
There's little left that any man can do
Without some other fellow stepping in
And doing it as well. If one essay
To pick a pocket he is sure to feel
(With what disgust I need not say to you)
Another hand inserted in the same.
You crack a crib at dead of night, and lo!
As you explore the dining-room for plate
You find, in session there, a graceless band
Stuffing their coats with spoons, their skins with wine.
And so it goes. Why even undertake
To salt a mine and you will find it rich
With noble specimens placed there before!

LELAND, THE KID:

And yet this line of immigration has
Advantages superior to aught
That elsewhere offers: all these passengers,
If punched with care--

COWBOY CHARLEY:

                   Significant remark!
It opens up a prospect wide and fair,
Suggesting to the thoughtful mind--_my_ mind--
A scheme that is the boss lay-out. Instead
Of stopping passengers, let's carry them.
Instead of crying out: "Throw up your hands!"
Let's say: "Walk up and buy a ticket!" Why
Should we unwieldy goods and bullion take,
Watches and all such trifles, when we might
Far better charge their value three times o'er
For carrying them to market?

LELAND, THE KID:

                              Put it there,
Old son!

HAPPY HUNTY:

          You take the cake, my dear. We'll build
A mighty railroad through this pass, and then
The stage folk will come up to us and squeal,
And say: "It is bad medicine for both:
What will you give or take?" And then we'll sell.

COWBOY CHARLEY:

Enlarge your notions, little one; this is
No petty, slouching, opposition scheme,
To be bought off like honest men and fools;
Mine eye prophetic pierces through the mists
That cloud the future, and I seem to see
A well-devised and executed scheme
Of wholesale robbery within the law
(Made by ourselves)--great, permanent, sublime,
And strong to grapple with the public throat--
Shaking the stuffing from the public purse,
The tears from bankrupt merchants' eyes, the blood
From widows' famished carcasses, the bread
From orphans' mouths!

HAPPY HUNTY:

                      Hooray!

LELAND, THE; KID:

                              Hooray!

ALL:

                                      Hooray!

_(They tear the masks from their faces, and discharging their
shotguns, throw them into the chapparal. Then they join hands,
dance and sing the following song:)_

Ah! blessed to measure
The glittering treasure!
  Ah! blessed to heap up the gold
             Untold
That flows in a wide
And deepening tide--
  Rolled, rolled, rolled
From multifold sources,
Converging its courses
  Upon our--

LELAND, THE KID:

Just wait a bit, my pards, I thought I heard
A sneaking grizzly cracking the dry twigs.
Such an intrusion might deprive the State
Of all the good that we intend it. Ha!

_(Enter Sootymug. He saunters carelessly in and gracefully
leans his back against a redwood.)_

SOOTYMUG:

My boys, I thought I heard
  Some careless revelry,
As if your minds were stirred
  By some new devilry.
I too am in that line. Indeed, the mission
On which I come--

HAPPY HUNTY:

            Here's more damned competition!
              _(Curtain.)_




A BAD NIGHT

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.

VILLIAM                    _a Sen_
NEEDLESON             _a Sidniduc_
SMILER               _a Scheister_
KI-YI                   _a Trader_
GRIMGHAST               _a Spader_
SARALTHIA      _a Love-lorn Nymph_
NELLIBRAC              _a Sweetun_

A BODY; A GHOST; AN UNMENTIONABLE THING; SKULLS;
HOODOOS; ETC.

_Scene_--a Cemetery in San Francisco.

_Saralthia, Nellibrac, Grimghast._


SARALTHIA:

The red half-moon is dipping to the west,
And the cold fog invades the sleeping land.
Lo! how the grinning skulls in the level light
Litter the place! Methinks that every skull
Is a most lifelike portrait of my Sen,
Drawn by the hand of Death; each fleshless pate,
Cursed with a ghastly grin to eyes unrubbed
With love's magnetic ointment, seems to mine
To smile an amiable smile like his
Whose amiable smile I--I alone
Am able to distinguish from his leer!
See how the gathering coyotes flit
Through the lit spaces, or with burning eyes
Star the black shadows with a steadfast gaze!
About my feet the poddy toads at play,
Bulbously comfortable, try to hop,
And tumble clumsily with all their warts;
While pranking lizards, sliding up and down
My limbs, as they were public roads, impart
A singularly interesting chill.
The circumstance and passion of the time,
The cast and manner of the place--the spirit
Of this confederate environment,
Command the rights we come to celebrate
Obedient to the Inspired Hag--
The seventh daughter of the seventh daughter,
Who rules all destinies from Minna street,
A dollar a destiny. Here at this grave,
Which for my purposes thou, Jack of Spades--
               _(To Grimghast_)
Corrupter than the thing that reeks below--
Hast opened secretly, we'll work the charm.
Now what's the hour?
                 _(Distant clock strikes thirteen_.)
                 Enough--hale forth the stiff!

_(Grimghast by means of a boat-hook stands the coffin on end
in the excavation; the lid crumbles, exposing the remains of a
man.)_

Ha! Master Mouldybones, how fare you, sir?

THE BODY:

Poorly, I thank your ladyship; I miss
Some certain fingers and an ear or two.
There's something, too, gone wrong with my inside,
And my periphery's not what it was.
How can we serve each other, you and I?

NELLIBRAC:

O what a personable man!

_(Blushes bashfully, drops her eyes and twists the corner of
her apron_.)

SARALTHIA:

                            Yes, dear,
A very proper and alluring male,
And quite superior to Lubin Rroyd,
Who has, however, this distinct advantage--
He is alive.

GRIMGHAST:

                  Missus, these yer remains
Was the boss singer back in '72,
And used to allers git invites to go
Down to Swellmont and sing at every feed.
In t'other Villiam's time, that was, afore
The gent that you've hooked onto bought the place.

THE BODY _(singing):_

Down among the sainted dead
  Many years I lay;
Beetles occupied my head,
  Moles explored my clay.

There we feasted day and night--
  I and bug and beast;
They provided appetite
  And I supplied the feast.

The raven is a dicky-bird,

SARALTHIA _(singing):_

The jackal is a daisy,

NELLIBRAC _(singing):_

        The wall-mouse is a worthy third,

A SPOOK _(singing):_

        But mortals all are crazy.

CHORUS OF SKULLS:

        O mortals all are crazy,
        Their intellects are hazy;
In the growing moon they shake their shoon
        And trip it in the mazy.

        But when the moon is waning,
        Their senses they're regaining:
      They fall to prayer and from their hair
        Remove the straws remaining.

SARALTHIA:

That's right, Rogues Gallery, pray keep it up:
Your song recalls my Villiam's "Auld Lang Syne,"
What time he came and (like an amorous bird
That struts before the female of its kind,
Warbling to cave her down the bank) piped high
His cracked falsetto out of reach. Enough--
Now let's to business. Nellibrac, sweet child,
St. Cloacina's future devotee,
The time is ripe and rotten--gut the grip!

_(Nellibrac brings forward a valise and takes from it five
articles of clothing, which, one by one, she lays upon the points
of a magic pentagram that has thoughtfully inscribed itself in
lines of light on the wet grass. The Body holds its late lamented
nose.)_

NELLIBRAC _(singing):_

        Fragrant socks, by Villiam's toes
        Consecrated to the nose;

        Shirt that shows the well worn track
        Of the knuckles of his back,

        Handkerchief with mottled stains,
        Into which he blew his brains;

        Collar crying out for soap--
        Prophet of the future rope;

        An unmentionable thing
        It would sicken me to sing.

UNMENTIONABLE THING _(aside):_

What! _I_ unmentionable? Just you wait!
In all the family journals of the State
You'll sometime see that I'm described at length,
With supereditorial grace and strength.

SARALTHIA _(singing):_

        Throw them in the open tomb
        They will cause his love to bloom
        With an amatory boom!

CHORUS OF INVISIBLE HOODOOS:

        Hoodoo, hoodoo, voudou-vet
        Villiam struggles in the net!
        By the power and intent
        Of the charm his strength is spent!
        By the virtue in each rag
        Blessed by the Inspired Hag
        He will be a willing victim
        Limp as if a donkey kicked him!
        By this awful incantation
        We decree his animation--

        By the magic of our art
        Warm the cockles of his heart,
        Villiam, if alive or dead,
        Thou Saralthia shalt wed!

_(They cast the garments into the grave and push over the
coffin. Grimghast fills up the hole. Hoodoos gradually become
apparent in a phosphorescent light about the grave, holding one
another's back-hair and dancing in a circle.)_

HOODOO SONG AND DANCE:

  O we're the larrikin hoodoos!
  The chirruping, lirruping hoodoos!
  We mix things up that the Fates ordain,
  Bring back the past and the present detain,
  Postpone the future and sometimes tether
  The three and drive them abreast together--
  We rollicking, frolicking hoodoos!

  To us all things are the same as none
  And nothing is that is under the sun.
  Seven's a dozen and never is then,
  Whether is what and what is when,
  A man is a tree and a cuckoo a cow
  For gold galore and silver enow
  To magical, mystical hoodoos!

SARALTHIA:

What monstrous shadow darkens all the place,

                         _(Enter Smyler.)_

Flung like a doom athwart--ha!--thou?
Portentous presence, art thou not the same
That stalks with aspect horrible among
Small youths and maidens, baring snaggy teeth,
Champing their tender limbs till crimson spume,
Flung from, thy lips in cursing God and man,
Incarnadines the land?

SMYLER:

                       Thou dammid slut!

                              _(Exit Smyler.)_

NELLIBRAC:

O what a pretty man!

SARALTHIA

                     Now who is next?
Of tramps and casuals this graveyard seems
Prolific to a fault!

_(Enter Needleson, exhaling, prophetically, an odor of decayed
eggs and, actually, one of unlaundried linen. He darts an
intense regard at an adjacent marble angel and places his open
hand behind his ear.)_

NEEDLESON:

                     Hay?
                               _(Exit Needleson.)_

NELLIBRAC:

                          Sweet, sweet male!
I yearn to play at Copenhagen with him!

                    _(Blushes diligently and energetically.)_

CHORUS OF SKULLS:

      Hoodoos, hoodoos, disappear--
      Some dread deity draws near!

                               _(Exeunt Hoodos.)_

      Smitten with a sense of doom,
      The dead are cowering in the tomb,
      Seas are calling, stars are falling
      And appalling is the gloom!
      Fragmentary flames are flung
      Through the air the trees among!
      Lo! each hill inclines its head--
      Earth is bending 'neath his thread!

_(On the contrary, enter Villiam on a chip, navigating an
odor of mignonette. Saralthia springs forward to put him in
her pocket, but he is instantly retracted by an invisible string.
She falls headlong, breaking her heart. Reenter Villiam,
Needleson, Smyler. All gather about Saralthia, who loudly
laments her accident. The Spirit of Tar-and Feathers, rising
like a black smoke in their midst, executes a monstrous wink of
graphic and vivid significance, then contemplates them with an
obviously baptismal intention. The cross on Lone Mountain
takes fire, splendoring the Peninsula. Tableau. Curtain.)_




ON STONE




_As in a dream, strange epitaphs I see,
  Inscribed on yet unquarried stone,
  Where wither flowers yet unstrown--
The Campo Santo of the time to be_.




A WREATH OF IMMORTELLES

                                   

LORING PICKERING

_(After Pope)_


Here rests a writer, great but not immense,
Born destitute of feeling and of sense.
No power he but o'er his brain desired--
How not to suffer it to be inspired.
Ideas unto him were all unknown,
Proud of the words which, only, were his own.
So unreflecting, so confused his mind,
Torpid in error, indolently blind,
A fever Heaven, to quicken him, applied,
But, rather than revive, the sluggard died.

                                   

A WATER-PIRATE


Pause, stranger--whence you lightly tread
Bill Carr's immoral part has fled.
For him no heart of woman burned,
But all the rivers' heads he turned.
Alas! he now lifts up his eyes
In torment and for water cries,
Entreating that he may procure
One drop to cool his parched McClure!

                                   

C.P. BERRY


Here's crowbait!--ravens, too, and daws
Flock hither to advance their caws,
And, with a sudden courage armed,
Devour the foe who once alarmed--
In life and death a fair deceit:
Nor strong to harm nor good to eat.
King bogey of the scarecrow host,
When known the least affrighting most,
Though light his hand (his mind was dark)
He left on earth a straw Berry mark.

                                   

THE REV. JOSEPH


He preached that sickness he could floor
  By prayer and by commanding;
When sick himself he sent for four
  Physicians in good standing.
He was struck dead despite their care,
  For, fearing their dissension,
He secretly put up a prayer,
  Thus drawing God's attention.

                                   

Cynic perforce from studying mankind
In the false volume of his single mind,
He damned his fellows for his own unworth,
And, bad himself, thought nothing good on earth.
Yet, still so judging and so erring still,
Observing well, but understanding ill,
His learning all was got by dint of sight,
And what he learned by day he lost by night.
When hired to flatter he would never cease
Till those who'd paid for praises paid for peace.
Not wholly miser and but half a knave,
He yearned to squander but he lived to save,
And did not, for he could not, cheat the grave.
_Hic jacet_ Pixley, scribe and muleteer:
Step lightly, stranger, anywhere but here.

                                   

McAllister, of talents rich and rare,
  Lies at this spot at finish of his race.
Alike to him if it is here or there:
  The one spot that he cared for was the ace.

                                   

Here lies Joseph Redding, who gave us the catfish.
He dined upon every fish except that fish.
'Twas touching to hear him expounding his fad
With a heart full of zeal and a mouth full of shad.
The catfish miaowed with unspeakable woe
When Death, the lone fisherman, landed their Jo.

                                   

Judge Sawyer, whom in vain the people tried
To push from power, here is laid aside.
Death only from the bench could ever start
The sluggish load of his immortal part.

                                   

John Irish went, one luckless day,
To loaf and fish at San Jose.
He got no loaf, he got no fish:
They brained him with an empty dish!
They laid him in this place asleep--
O come, ye crocodiles, and weep.

                                   

In Sacramento City here
This wooden monument we rear
In memory of Dr. May,
Whose smile even Death could not allay.
He's buried, Heaven alone knows where,
And only the hyenas care;
This May-pole merely marks the spot
Where, ere the wretch began to rot,
Fame's trumpet, with its brazen bray,
Bawled; "Who (and why) was Dr. May?"

                                   

Dennis Spencer's mortal coil
Here is laid away to spoil--
Great riparian, who said
Not a stream should leave its bed.
Now his soul would like a river
Turned upon its parching liver.

                                   

For those this mausoleum is erected
Who Stanford to the Upper House elected.
Their luck is less or their promotion slower,
For, dead, they were elected to the Lower.

                                   

Beneath this stone lies Reuben Lloyd,
Of breath deprived, of sense devoid.
The Templars' Captain-General, he
So formidable seemed to be,
That had he not been on his back
Death ne'er had ventured to attack.

                                   

Here lies Barnes in all his glory--
Master he of oratOry.
When he died the people weeping,
(For they thought him only sleeping)
Cried: "Although he now is quiet
And his tongue is not a riot,
Soon, the spell that binds him breaking,
He a motion will be making.
Then, alas, he'll rise and speak
In support of it a week."

                                   

Rash mortal! stay thy feet and look around--
This vacant tomb as yet is holy ground;
But soon, alas! Jim Fair will occupy
These premises--then, holiness, good-bye!

                                   

Here Salomon's body reposes;
Bring roses, ye rebels, bring roses.
Set all of your drumsticks a-rolling,
Discretion and Valor extrolling:
Discretion--he always retreated--
And Valor--the dead he defeated.
Brings roses, ye loyal, bring roses:
As patriot here he re-poses.

                                   

When Waterman ended his bright career
He left his wet name to history here.
To carry it with him he did not care:
'Twould tantalize spirits of statesmen There.

                                   

Here lie the remains of Fred Emerson Brooks,
A poet, as every one knew by his looks
Who hadn't unluckily met with his books.

On civic occasions he sprang to the fore
With poems consisting of stanzas three score.
The men whom they deafened enjoyed them the more.

Of reason his fantasy knew not the check:
All forms of inharmony came at his beck.
The weight of his ignorance fractured his neck.

In this peaceful spot, so the grave-diggers say,
With pen, ink and paper they laid him away--
The Poet-elect of the Judgment Day.

                                   

  George Perry here lies stiff and stark,
With stone at foot and stone at head.
  His heart was dark, his mind was dark--
"Ignorant ass!" the people said.

  Not ignorant but skilled, alas,
In all the secrets of his trade:
  He knew more ways to be an ass
Than any ass that ever brayed.

                                   

Here lies the last of Deacon Fitch,
Whose business was to melt the pitch.
Convenient to this sacred spot
Lies Sammy, who applied it, hot.
'Tis hard--so much alike they smell--

One's grave from t'other's grave to tell,
But when his tomb the Deacon's burst
(Of two he'll always be the first)
He'll see by studying the stones
That he's obtained his proper bones,
Then, seeking Sammy's vault, unlock it,
And put that person in his pocket.

                                   

Beneath this stone O'Donnell's tongue's at rest--
Our noses by his spirit still addressed.
Living or dead, he's equally Satanic--
His noise a terror and his smell a panic.

                                   

When Gabriel blows a dreadful blast
And swears that Time's forever past,
Days, weeks, months, years all one at last,
Then Asa Fiske, laid here, distressed,
Will beat (and skin his hand) his breast:
There'll be no rate of interest!

                                   

Step lightly, stranger: here Jerome B. Cox
Is for the second time in a bad box.
He killed a man--the labor party rose
And showed him by its love how killing goes.

                                   

  When Vrooman here lay down to sleep,
  The other dead awoke to weep.
"Since he no longer lives," they said
"Small honor comes of being dead."

                                   

Here Porter Ashe is laid to rest
Green grows the grass upon his breast.
This patron of the turf, I vow,
Ne'er served it half so well as now.

                                   

Like a cold fish escaping from its tank,
Hence fled the soul of Joe Russel, crank.
He cried: "Cold water!" roaring like a beast.
'Twas thrown upon him and the music ceased.

                                   

Here Estee rests. He shook a basket,
When, like a jewel from its casket,
Fell Felton out. Said Estee, shouting
With mirth; "I've given you an outing."
Then told him to go back. He wouldn't.
Then tried to _put_ him back. He couldn't.
So Estee died (his blood congealing
In Felton's growing shadow) squealing.

                                   

Mourn here for one Bruner, called Elwood.
He doesn't--he never did--smell good
  To noses of critics and scholars.
If now he'd an office to sell could
He sell it? O, no--where (in Hell) could
  He find a cool four hundred dollars?

                                   

Here Stanford lies, who thought it odd
That he should go to meet his God.
He looked, until his eyes grew dim,
For God to hasten to meet him.



E.P.
ODE POUR SELECTION DE SON SEPULCHRE

FOR three years, out of key with his time,
He strove to resuscitate the dead art
Of poetry; to maintain "the sublime"
In the old sense. Wrong from the start--

No hardly, but, seeing he had been born
In a half savage country, out of date;
Bent resolutely on wringing lilies from the acorn;
Capaneus; trout for factitious bait;

_idmen gar toi pan panth', os' eni Troieh_
Caught in the unstopped ear;
Giving the rocks small lee-way
The chopped seas held him, therefore, that year.

His true Penelope was Flaubert,
He fished by obstinate isles;
Observed the elegance of Circe's hair
Rather than the mottoes on sun-dials.

Unaffected by "the march of events,"
He passed from men's memory in _l'an trentiesme
De son eage_; the case presents
No adjunct to the Muses' diadem.


II.

THE age demanded an image
Of its accelerated grimace,
Something for the modern stage,
Not, at any rate, an Attic grace;

Not, not certainly, the obscure reveries
Of the inward gaze;
Better mendacities
Than the classics in paraphrase!

The "age demanded" chiefly a mould in plaster,
Made with no loss of time,
A prose kinema, not, not assuredly, alabaster
Or the "sculpture" of rhyme.


III.

THE tea-rose tea-gown, etc.
Supplants the mousseline of Cos,
The pianola "replaces"
Sappho's barbitos.

Christ follows Dionysus,
Phallic and ambrosial
Made way for macerations;
Caliban casts out Ariel.

All things are a flowing,
Sage Heracleitus says;
But a tawdry cheapness
Shall reign throughout our days.

Even the Christian beauty
Defects--after Samothrace;
We see _to kalon_
Decreed in the market place.

Faun's flesh is not to us,
Nor the saint's vision.
We have the press for wafer;
Franchise for circumcision.

All men, in law, are equals.
Free of Peisistratus,
We choose a knave or an eunuch
To rule over us.

O bright Apollo,
_tin'  andra, tin'  ehroha, tina theon_,
What god, man, or hero
Shall I place a tin wreath upon!


IV.

THESE fought, in any case,
and some believing, pro domo, in any case . .
Some quick to arm,
some for adventure,
some from fear of weakness,
some from fear of censure,
some for love of slaughter, in imagination,
learning later . . .

some in fear, learning love of slaughter;
Died some "pro patria, non dulce non et decor". .

walked eye-deep in hell
believing in old men's lies, then unbelieving
came home, home to a lie,
home to many deceits,
home to old lies and new infamy;

usury age-old and age-thick
and liars in public places.

Daring as never before, wastage as never before.
Young blood and high blood,
Fair cheeks, and fine bodies;

fortitude as never before

frankness as never before,
disillusions as never told in the old days,
hysterias, trench confessions,
laughter out of dead bellies.


V.

THERE died a myriad,
And of the best, among them,
For an old bitch gone in the teeth,
For a botched civilization,

Charm, smiling at the good mouth,
Quick eyes gone under earth's lid,

For two gross of broken statues,
For a few thousand battered books.


YEUX GLAUQUES

GLADSTONE was still respected,
When John Ruskin produced
"Kings Treasuries"; Swinburne
And Rossetti still abused.

Foetid Buchanan lifted up his voice
When that faun's head of hers
Became a pastime for
Painters and adulterers.

The Burne-Jones cartons
Have preserved her eyes;
Still, at the Tate, they teach
Cophetua to rhapsodize;

Thin like brook-water,
With a vacant gaze.
The English Rubaiyat was still-born
In those days.

The thin, clear gaze, the same
Still darts out faun-like from the half-ruin'd fac
Questing and passive ....
"Ah, poor Jenny's case"...

Bewildered that a world
Shows no surprise
At her last maquero's
Adulteries.


"SIENA MI FE', DISFECEMI MAREMMA"

AMONG the pickled foetuses and bottled bones,
Engaged in perfecting the catalogue,
I found the last scion of the
Senatorial families of Strasbourg, Monsieur Verog.

For two hours he talked of Gallifet;
Of Dowson; of the Rhymers' Club;
Told me how Johnson (Lionel) died
By falling from a high stool in a pub . . .

But showed no trace of alcohol
At the autopsy, privately performed--
Tissue preserved--the pure mind
Arose toward Newman as the whiskey warmed.

Dowson found harlots cheaper than hotels;
Headlam for uplift; Image impartially imbued
With raptures for Bacchus, Terpsichore and the Church.
So spoke the author of "The Dorian Mood",

M. Verog, out of step with the decade,
Detached from his contemporaries,
Neglected by the young,
Because of these reveries.


BRENNBAUM.

THE sky-like limpid eyes,
The circular infant's face,
The stiffness from spats to collar
Never relaxing into grace;

The heavy memories of Horeb, Sinai and the forty years,
Showed only when the daylight fell
Level across the face
Of Brennbaum "The Impeccable".


MR. NIXON

IN the cream gilded cabin of his steam yacht
Mr. Nixon advised me kindly, to advance with fewer
Dangers of delay. "Consider
    "Carefully the reviewer.

"I was as poor as you are;
"When I began I got, of course,
"Advance on royalties, fifty at first", said Mr. Nixon,
"Follow me, and take a column,
"Even if you have to work free.

"Butter reviewers. From fifty to three hundred
"I rose in eighteen months;
"The hardest nut I had to crack
"Was Dr. Dundas.

"I never mentioned a man but with the view
"Of selling my own works.
"The tip's a good one, as for literature
"It gives no man a sinecure."

And no one knows, at sight a masterpiece.
And give up verse, my boy,
There's nothing in it.

                   *    *    *

Likewise a friend of Bloughram's once advised me:
Don't kick against the pricks,
Accept opinion. The "Nineties" tried your game
And died, there's nothing in it.


X.

BENEATH the sagging roof
The stylist has taken shelter,
Unpaid, uncelebrated,
At last from the world's welter

Nature receives him,
With a placid and uneducated mistress
He exercises his talents
And the soil meets his distress.

The haven from sophistications and contentions
Leaks through its thatch;
He offers succulent cooking;
The door has a creaking latch.


XI.

"CONSERVATRIX of Milesien"
Habits of mind and feeling,
Possibly. But in Ealing
With the most bank-clerkly of Englishmen?

No, "Milesien" is an exaggeration.
No instinct has survived in her
Older than those her grandmother
Told her would fit her station.


XII.

"DAPHNE with her thighs in bark
Stretches toward me her leafy hands",--
Subjectively. In the stuffed-satin drawing-room
I await The Lady Valentine's commands,

Knowing my coat has never been
Of precisely the fashion
To stimulate, in her,
A durable passion;

Doubtful, somewhat, of the value
Of well-gowned approbation
Of literary effort,
But never of The Lady Valentine's vocation:

Poetry, her border of ideas,
The edge, uncertain, but a means of blending
With other strata
Where the lower and higher have ending;

A hook to catch the Lady Jane's attention,
A modulation toward the theatre,
Also, in the case of revolution,
A possible friend and comforter.

             *       *       *

Conduct, on the other hand, the soul
"Which the highest cultures have nourished"
To Fleet St. where
Dr. Johnson flourished;

Beside this thoroughfare
The sale of half-hose has
Long since superseded the cultivation
Of Pierian roses.


ENVOI (1919)

GO, dumb-born book,
Tell her that sang me once that song of Lawes;
Hadst thou but song
As thou hast subjects known,
Then were there cause in thee that should condone
Even my faults that heavy upon me lie
And build her glories their longevity.

Tell her that sheds
Such treasure in the air,
Recking naught else but that her graces give
Life to the moment,
I would bid them live
As roses might, in magic amber laid,
Red overwrought with orange and all made
One substance and one colour
Braving time.

Tell her that goes
With song upon her lips
But sings not out the song, nor knows
The maker of it, some other mouth,
May be as fair as hers,
Might, in new ages, gain her worshippers,
When our two dusts with Waller's shall be laid,
Siftings on siftings in oblivion,
Till change hath broken down
All things save Beauty alone.


1920

(MAUBERLEY)

            I.

TURNED from the "eau-forte
Par Jaquemart"
To the strait head
Of Mcssalina:

"His true Penelope
Was Flaubert",
And his tool
The engraver's

Firmness,
Not the full smile,
His art, but an art
In profile;

Colourless
Pier Francesca,
Pisanello lacking the skill
To forge Achaia.

            II.

     _"Qu'est ce qu'ils savent de l'amour, et
      gu'est ce qu'ils peuvent comprendre?
      S'ils ne comprennent pas la poesie,
      s'ils ne sentent pas la musique, qu'est ce
      qu'ils peuvent comprendre de cette pas-
      sion en comparaison avec laquelle la rose
      est grossiere et le parfum des violettes un
      tonnerre?"_            CAID ALI

FOR three years, diabolus in the scale,
He drank ambrosia,
All passes, ANANGKE prevails,
Came end, at last, to that Arcadia.

He had moved amid her phantasmagoria,
Amid her galaxies,
NUKTIS AGALMA

Drifted....drifted precipitate,
Asking time to be rid of....
Of his bewilderment; to designate
His new found orchid....

To be certain....certain...
(Amid aerial flowers)..time for arrangements--
Drifted on
To the final estrangement;

Unable in the supervening blankness
To sift TO AGATHON from the chaff
Until he found his seive...
Ultimately, his seismograph:

--Given, that is, his urge
To convey the relation
Of eye-lid and cheek-bone
By verbal manifestation;

To present the series
Of curious heads in medallion--

He had passed, inconscient, full gaze,
The wide-banded irises
And botticellian sprays implied
In their diastasis;

Which anaesthesis, noted a year late,
And weighed, revealed his great affect,
(Orchid), mandate
Of Eros, a retrospect.

            .     .     .

Mouths biting empty air,
The still stone dogs,
Caught in metamorphosis were,
Left him as epilogues.


"THE AGE DEMANDED"

VIDE POEM II.

FOR this agility chance found
Him of all men, unfit
As the red-beaked steeds of
The Cytheraean for a chain-bit.

The glow of porcelain
Brought no reforming sense
To his perception
Of the social inconsequence.

Thus, if her colour
Came against his gaze,
Tempered as if
It were through a perfect glaze

He made no immediate application
Of this to relation of the state
To the individual, the month was more temperate
Because this beauty had been
    ......
           The coral isle, the lion-coloured sand
           Burst in upon the porcelain revery:
           Impetuous troubling
           Of his imagery.
    ......

Mildness, amid the neo-Neitzschean clatter,
His sense of graduations,
Quite out of place amid
Resistance to current exacerbations

Invitation, mere invitation to perceptivity
Gradually led him to the isolation
Which these presents place
Under a more tolerant, perhaps, examination.

By constant elimination
The manifest universe
Yielded an armour
Against utter consternation,

A Minoan undulation,
Seen, we admit, amid ambrosial circumstances
Strengthened him against
The discouraging doctrine of chances

And his desire for survival,
Faint in the most strenuous moods,
Became an Olympian _apathein_
In the presence of selected perceptions.

A pale gold, in the aforesaid pattern,
The unexpected palms
Destroying, certainly, the artist's urge,
Left him delighted with the imaginary
Audition of the phantasmal sea-surge,

Incapable of the least utterance or composition,
Emendation, conservation of the "better tradition",
Refinement of medium, elimination of superfluities,
August attraction or concentration.

Nothing in brief, but maudlin confession
Irresponse to human aggression,
Amid the precipitation, down-float
Of insubstantial manna
Lifting the faint susurrus
Of his subjective hosannah.

Ultimate affronts to human redundancies;

Non-esteem of self-styled "his betters"
Leading, as he well knew,
To his final
Exclusion from the world of letters.


      IV.

SCATTERED Moluccas
Not knowing, day to day,
The first day's end, in the next noon;
The placid water
Unbroken by the Simoon;

Thick foliage
Placid beneath warm suns,
Tawn fore-shores
Washed in the cobalt of oblivions;

Or through dawn-mist
The grey and rose
Of the juridical
Flamingoes;

A consciousness disjunct,
Being but this overblotted
Series
Of intermittences;

Coracle of Pacific voyages,
The unforecasted beach:
Then on an oar
Read this:

"I was
And I no more exist;
Here drifted
An hedonist."


MEDALLION

LUINI in porcelain!
The grand piano
Utters a profane
Protest with her clear soprano.

The sleek head emerges
From the gold-yellow frock
As Anadyomene in the opening
Pages of Reinach.

Honey-red, closing the face-oval
A basket-work of braids which seem as if they were
Spun in King Minos' hall
From metal, or intractable amber;

The face-oval beneath the glaze,
Bright in its suave bounding-line, as
Beneath half-watt rays
The eyes turn topaz.


THIS EDITION OF 200 COPIES IS THE THIRD BOOK
   OF THE OVID PRESS: WAS PRINTED BY JOHN
      RODKER: AND COMPLETED APRIL
              23RD. 1920

OF THIS EDITION:--

15 Copies on Japan Vellum numbered 1-15 & not for sale.
20 Signed copies numbered 16-35
165 Unsigned copies numbered 36-200

The initials & colophon by E. Wadsworth.


      The . OVID . PRESS

    43 BELSIZE PARK GARDENS

        LONDON N.W.3

        PART 1.

     Nec tantum prodere vati,
     Quantum scire licet. Venit aetas omnis in unam
     Congeriem, miserumque premunt tot saecula pectus.
     LUCAN, Phars. v. 176.

       How wonderful is Death,
       Death and his brother Sleep!
     One pale as yonder wan and horned moon,
       With lips of lurid blue,
     The other glowing like the vital morn,                        5
       When throned on ocean's wave
       It breathes over the world:
     Yet both so passing strange and wonderful!

     Hath then the iron-sceptred Skeleton,
     Whose reign is in the tainted sepulchres,                    10
     To the hell dogs that couch beneath his throne
     Cast that fair prey? Must that divinest form,
     Which love and admiration cannot view
     Without a beating heart, whose azure veins
     Steal like dark streams along a field of snow,               15
     Whose outline is as fair as marble clothed
     In light of some sublimest mind, decay?
       Nor putrefaction's breath
     Leave aught of this pure spectacle
       But loathsomeness and ruin?--                              20
       Spare aught but a dark theme,
     On which the lightest heart might moralize?
     Or is it but that downy-winged slumbers
     Have charmed their nurse coy Silence near her lids
       To watch their own repose?                                 25
       Will they, when morning's beam
       Flows through those wells of light,
     Seek far from noise and day some western cave,
     Where woods and streams with soft and pausing winds
       A lulling murmur weave?--                                  30
       Ianthe doth not sleep
       The dreamless sleep of death:
     Nor in her moonlight chamber silently
     Doth Henry hear her regular pulses throb,
       Or mark her delicate cheek                                 35
     With interchange of hues mock the broad moon,
       Outwatching weary night,
       Without assured reward.
       Her dewy eyes are closed;
     On their translucent lids, whose texture fine                40
     Scarce hides the dark blue orbs that burn below
       With unapparent fire,
       The baby Sleep is pillowed:
       Her golden tresses shade
       The bosom's stainless pride,                               45
     Twining like tendrils of the parasite
       Around a marble column.

       Hark! whence that rushing sound?
       'Tis like a wondrous strain that sweeps
       Around a lonely ruin                                       50
     When west winds sigh and evening waves respond
       In whispers from the shore:
     'Tis wilder than the unmeasured notes
     Which from the unseen lyres of dells and groves
       The genii of the breezes sweep.                            55
     Floating on waves of music and of light,
     The chariot of the Daemon of the World
       Descends in silent power:
     Its shape reposed within: slight as some cloud
     That catches but the palest tinge of day                     60
       When evening yields to night,
     Bright as that fibrous woof when stars indue
       Its transitory robe.
     Four shapeless shadows bright and beautiful
     Draw that strange car of glory, reins of light               65
     Check their unearthly speed; they stop and fold
       Their wings of braided air:
     The Daemon leaning from the ethereal car
       Gazed on the slumbering maid.
     Human eye hath ne'er beheld                                  70
     A shape so wild, so bright, so beautiful,
     As that which o'er the maiden's charmed sleep
       Waving a starry wand,
       Hung like a mist of light.
     Such sounds as breathed around like odorous winds            75
       Of wakening spring arose,
     Filling the chamber and the moonlight sky.
     Maiden, the world's supremest spirit
       Beneath the shadow of her wings
     Folds all thy memory doth inherit                            80
       From ruin of divinest things,
       Feelings that lure thee to betray,
       And light of thoughts that pass away.
     For thou hast earned a mighty boon,
       The truths which wisest poets see                          85
     Dimly, thy mind may make its own,
       Rewarding its own majesty,
       Entranced in some diviner mood
       Of self-oblivious solitude.

     Custom, and Faith, and Power thou spurnest;                  90
       From hate and awe thy heart is free;
     Ardent and pure as day thou burnest,
       For dark and cold mortality
       A living light, to cheer it long,
       The watch-fires of the world among.                        95

     Therefore from nature's inner shrine,
       Where gods and fiends in worship bend,
     Majestic spirit, be it thine
       The flame to seize, the veil to rend,
       Where the vast snake Eternity                             100
       In charmed sleep doth ever lie.

     All that inspires thy voice of love,
       Or speaks in thy unclosing eyes,
     Or through thy frame doth burn or move,
       Or think or feel, awake, arise!                           105
       Spirit, leave for mine and me
       Earth's unsubstantial mimicry!

     It ceased, and from the mute and moveless frame
       A radiant spirit arose,
     All beautiful in naked purity.                              110
     Robed in its human hues it did ascend,
     Disparting as it went the silver clouds,
     It moved towards the car, and took its seat
       Beside the Daemon shape.

     Obedient to the sweep of aery song,                         115
       The mighty ministers
     Unfurled their prismy wings.
       The magic car moved on;
     The night was fair, innumerable stars
       Studded heaven's dark blue vault;                         120
       The eastern wave grew pale
       With the first smile of morn.
       The magic car moved on.
       From the swift sweep of wings
     The atmosphere in flaming sparkles flew;                    125
       And where the burning wheels
     Eddied above the mountain's loftiest peak
       Was traced a line of lightning.
     Now far above a rock the utmost verge
       Of the wide earth it flew,                                130
     The rival of the Andes, whose dark brow
       Frowned o'er the silver sea.
     Far, far below the chariot's stormy path,
       Calm as a slumbering babe,
       Tremendous ocean lay.                                     135
     Its broad and silent mirror gave to view
       The pale and waning stars,
       The chariot's fiery track,
       And the grey light of morn
       Tingeing those fleecy clouds                              140
     That cradled in their folds the infant dawn.
       The chariot seemed to fly
     Through the abyss of an immense concave,
     Radiant with million constellations, tinged
       With shades of infinite colour,                           145
       And semicircled with a belt
       Flashing incessant meteors.

       As they approached their goal,
     The winged shadows seemed to gather speed.
     The sea no longer was distinguished; earth                  150
     Appeared a vast and shadowy sphere, suspended
       In the black concave of heaven
       With the sun's cloudless orb,
       Whose rays of rapid light
     Parted around the chariot's swifter course,                 155
     And fell like ocean's feathery spray
       Dashed from the boiling surge
       Before a vessel's prow.

       The magic car moved on.
       Earth's distant orb appeared                              160
     The smallest light that twinkles in the heavens,
       Whilst round the chariot's way
     Innumerable systems widely rolled,
       And countless spheres diffused
       An ever varying glory.                                    165
     It was a sight of wonder! Some were horned,
     And like the moon's argentine crescent hung
     In the dark dome of heaven; some did shed
     A clear mild beam like Hesperus, while the sea
     Yet glows with fading sunlight; others dashed               170
     Athwart the night with trains of bickering fire,
     Like sphered worlds to death and ruin driven;
     Some shone like stars, and as the chariot passed
       Bedimmed all other light.

       Spirit of Nature! here                                    175
     In this interminable wilderness
     Of worlds, at whose involved immensity
       Even soaring fancy staggers,
       Here is thy fitting temple.
       Yet not the lightest leaf                                 180
     That quivers to the passing breeze
       Is less instinct with thee,--
       Yet not the meanest worm.
     That lurks in graves and fattens on the dead,
       Less shares thy eternal breath.                           185
       Spirit of Nature! thou
     Imperishable as this glorious scene,
       Here is thy fitting temple.

     If solitude hath ever led thy steps
     To the shore of the immeasurable sea,                       190
       And thou hast lingered there
       Until the sun's broad orb
     Seemed resting on the fiery line of ocean,
       Thou must have marked the braided webs of gold
       That without motion hang                                  195
       Over the sinking sphere:
     Thou must have marked the billowy mountain clouds,
     Edged with intolerable radiancy,
       Towering like rocks of jet
       Above the burning deep:                                   200
       And yet there is a moment
       When the sun's highest point
     Peers like a star o'er ocean's western edge,
     When those far clouds of feathery purple gleam
     Like fairy lands girt by some heavenly sea:                 205
     Then has thy rapt imagination soared
     Where in the midst of all existing things
     The temple of the mightiest Daemon stands.

       Yet not the golden islands
     That gleam amid yon flood of purple light,                  210
       Nor the feathery curtains
     That canopy the sun's resplendent couch,
       Nor the burnished ocean waves
       Paving that gorgeous dome,
       So fair, so wonderful a sight                             215
     As the eternal temple could afford.
     The elements of all that human thought
     Can frame of lovely or sublime, did join
     To rear the fabric of the fane, nor aught
     Of earth may image forth its majesty.                       220
     Yet likest evening's vault that faery hall,
     As heaven low resting on the wave it spread
       Its floors of flashing light,
       Its vast and azure dome;
     And on the verge of that obscure abyss                      225
     Where crystal battlements o'erhang the gulf
     Of the dark world, ten thousand spheres diffuse
     Their lustre through its adamantine gates.

       The magic car no longer moved;
       The Daemon and the Spirit                                 230
       Entered the eternal gates.
       Those clouds of aery gold
       That slept in glittering billows
       Beneath the azure canopy,
     With the ethereal footsteps trembled not;                   235
       While slight and odorous mists
     Floated to strains of thrilling melody
     Through the vast columns and the pearly shrines.

       The Daemon and the Spirit
     Approached the overhanging battlement,                      240
     Below lay stretched the boundless universe!
       There, far as the remotest line
     That limits swift imagination's flight.
     Unending orbs mingled in mazy motion,
       Immutably fulfilling                                      245
       Eternal Nature's law.
       Above, below, around,
       The circling systems formed
       A wilderness of harmony.
       Each with undeviating aim                                 250
     In eloquent silence through the depths of space
       Pursued its wondrous way.--

     Awhile the Spirit paused in ecstasy.
     Yet soon she saw, as the vast spheres swept by,
     Strange things within their belted orbs appear.             255
     Like animated frenzies, dimly moved
     Shadows, and skeletons, and fiendly shapes,
     Thronging round human graves, and o'er the dead
     Sculpturing records for each memory
     In verse, such as malignant gods pronounce,                 260
     Blasting the hopes of men, when heaven and hell
     Confounded burst in ruin o'er the world:
     And they did build vast trophies, instruments
     Of murder, human bones, barbaric gold,
     Skins torn from living men, and towers of skulls            265
     With sightless holes gazing on blinder heaven,
     Mitres, and crowns, and brazen chariots stained
     With blood, and scrolls of mystic wickedness,
     The sanguine codes of venerable crime.
     The likeness of a throned king came by.                     270
     When these had passed, bearing upon his brow
     A threefold crown; his countenance was calm.
     His eye severe and cold; but his right hand
     Was charged with bloody coin, and he did gnaw
     By fits, with secret smiles, a human heart                  275
     Concealed beneath his robe; and motley shapes,
     A multitudinous throng, around him knelt.
     With bosoms bare, and bowed heads, and false looks
     Of true submission, as the sphere rolled by.
     Brooking no eye to witness their foul shame,                280
     Which human hearts must feel, while human tongues
     Tremble to speak, they did rage horribly,
     Breathing in self-contempt fierce blasphemies
     Against the Daemon of the World, and high
     Hurling their armed hands where the pure Spirit,            285
     Serene and inaccessibly secure,
     Stood on an isolated pinnacle.
     The flood of ages combating below,
     The depth of the unbounded universe
       Above, and all around                                     290
     Necessity's unchanging harmony.




PART 2.

     O happy Earth! reality of Heaven!
     To which those restless powers that ceaselessly
     Throng through the human universe aspire;
     Thou consummation of all mortal hope!                       295
     Thou glorious prize of blindly-working will!
     Whose rays, diffused throughout all space and time,
     Verge to one point and blend for ever there:
     Of purest spirits thou pure dwelling-place!
     Where care and sorrow, impotence and crime,                 300
     Languor, disease, and ignorance dare not come:
     O happy Earth, reality of Heaven!

       Genius has seen thee in her passionate dreams,
     And dim forebodings of thy loveliness,
     Haunting the human heart, have there entwined               305
     Those rooted hopes, that the proud Power of Evil
     Shall not for ever on this fairest world
     Shake pestilence and war, or that his slaves
     With blasphemy for prayer, and human blood
     For sacrifice, before his shrine for ever                   310
     In adoration bend, or Erebus
     With all its banded fiends shall not uprise
     To overwhelm in envy and revenge
     The dauntless and the good, who dare to hurl
     Defiance at his throne, girt tho' it be                     315
     With Death's omnipotence. Thou hast beheld
     His empire, o'er the present and the past;
     It was a desolate sight--now gaze on mine,
     Futurity. Thou hoary giant Time,
     Render thou up thy half-devoured babes,--                   320
     And from the cradles of eternity,
     Where millions lie lulled to their portioned sleep
     By the deep murmuring stream of passing things,
     Tear thou that gloomy shroud.--Spirit, behold
     Thy glorious destiny!
       The Spirit saw                                            325
     The vast frame of the renovated world
     Smile in the lap of Chaos, and the sense
     Of hope thro' her fine texture did suffuse
     Such varying glow, as summer evening casts
     On undulating clouds and deepening lakes.                   330
     Like the vague sighings of a wind at even,
     That wakes the wavelets of the slumbering sea
     And dies on the creation of its breath,
     And sinks and rises, fails and swells by fits,
     Was the sweet stream of thought that with wild motion       335
     Flowed o'er the Spirit's human sympathies.
     The mighty tide of thought had paused awhile,
     Which from the Daemon now like Ocean's stream
     Again began to pour.--
       To me is given
     The wonders of the human world to keep--                    340
     Space, matter, time and mind--let the sight
     Renew and strengthen all thy failing hope.
     All things are recreated, and the flame
     Of consentaneous love inspires all life:
     The fertile bosom of the earth gives suck                   345
     To myriads, who still grow beneath her care,
     Rewarding her with their pure perfectness:
     The balmy breathings of the wind inhale
     Her virtues, and diffuse them all abroad:
     Health floats amid the gentle atmosphere,                   350
     Glows in the fruits, and mantles on the stream;
     No storms deform the beaming brow of heaven,
     Nor scatter in the freshness of its pride
     The foliage of the undecaying trees;
     But fruits are ever ripe, flowers ever fair,                355
     And Autumn proudly bears her matron grace,
     Kindling a flush on the fair cheek of Spring,
     Whose virgin bloom beneath the ruddy fruit
     Reflects its tint and blushes into love.

       The habitable earth is full of bliss;                     360
     Those wastes of frozen billows that were hurled
     By everlasting snow-storms round the poles,
     Where matter dared not vegetate nor live,
     But ceaseless frost round the vast solitude
     Bound its broad zone of stillness, are unloosed;            365
     And fragrant zephyrs there from spicy isles
     Ruffle the placid ocean-deep, that rolls
     Its broad, bright surges to the sloping sand,
     Whose roar is wakened into echoings sweet
     To murmur through the heaven-breathing groves               370
     And melodise with man's blest nature there.

       The vast tract of the parched and sandy waste
     Now teems with countless rills and shady woods,
     Corn-fields and pastures and white cottages;
     And where the startled wilderness did hear                  375
     A savage conqueror stained in kindred blood,
     Hymmng his victory, or the milder snake
     Crushing the bones of some frail antelope
     Within his brazen folds--the dewy lawn,
     Offering sweet incense to the sunrise, smiles               380
     To see a babe before his mother's door,
     Share with the green and golden basilisk
     That comes to lick his feet, his morning's meal.

       Those trackless deeps, where many a weary sail
     Has seen, above the illimitable plain,                      385
     Morning on night and night on morning rise,
     Whilst still no land to greet the wanderer spread
     Its shadowy mountains on the sunbright sea,
     Where the loud roarings of the tempest-waves
     So long have mingled with the gusty wind                    390
     In melancholy loneliness, and swept
     The desert of those ocean solitudes,
     But vocal to the sea-bird's harrowing shriek,
     The bellowing monster, and the rushing storm,
     Now to the sweet and many-mingling sounds                   395
     Of kindliest human impulses respond:
     Those lonely realms bright garden-isles begem,
     With lightsome clouds and shining seas between,
     And fertile valleys resonant with bliss,
     Whilst green woods overcanopy the wave,                     400
     Which like a toil-worn labourer leaps to shore,
     To meet the kisses of the flowerets there.

       Man chief perceives the change, his being notes
     The gradual renovation, and defines
     Each movement of its progress on his mind.                  405
     Man, where the gloom of the long polar night
     Lowered o'er the snow-clad rocks and frozen soil,
     Where scarce the hardiest herb that braves the frost
     Basked in the moonlight's ineffectual glow,
     Shrank with the plants, and darkened with the night;        410
     Nor where the tropics bound the realms of day
     With a broad belt of mingling cloud and flame,
     Where blue mists through the unmoving atmosphere
     Scattered the seeds of pestilence, and fed
     Unnatural vegetation, where the land                        415
     Teemed with all earthquake, tempest and disease,
     Was man a nobler being; slavery
     Had crushed him to his country's blood-stained dust.

       Even where the milder zone afforded man
     A seeming shelter, yet contagion there,                     420
     Blighting his being with unnumbered ills,
     Spread like a quenchless fire; nor truth availed
     Till late to arrest its progress, or create
     That peace which first in bloodless victory waved
     Her snowy standard o'er this favoured clime:                425
     There man was long the train-bearer of slaves,
     The mimic of surrounding misery,
     The jackal of ambition's lion-rage,
     The bloodhound of religion's hungry zeal.

       Here now the human being stands adorning                  430
     This loveliest earth with taintless body and mind;
     Blest from his birth with all bland impulses,
     Which gently in his noble bosom wake
     All kindly passions and all pure desires.
     Him, still from hope to hope the bliss pursuing,            435
     Which from the exhaustless lore of human weal
     Dawns on the virtuous mind, the thoughts that rise
     In time-destroying infiniteness gift
     With self-enshrined eternity, that mocks
     The unprevailing hoariness of age,                          440
     And man, once fleeting o'er the transient scene
     Swift as an unremembered vision, stands
     Immortal upon earth: no longer now
     He slays the beast that sports around his dwelling
     And horribly devours its mangled flesh,                     445
     Or drinks its vital blood, which like a stream
     Of poison thro' his fevered veins did flow
     Feeding a plague that secretly consumed
     His feeble frame, and kindling in his mind
     Hatred, despair, and fear and vain belief,                  450
     The germs of misery, death, disease and crime.
     No longer now the winged habitants,
     That in the woods their sweet lives sing away,
     Flee from the form of man; but gather round,
     And prune their sunny feathers on the hands                 455
     Which little children stretch in friendly sport
     Towards these dreadless partners of their play.
     All things are void of terror: man has lost
     His desolating privilege, and stands
     An equal amidst equals: happiness                           460
     And science dawn though late upon the earth;
     Peace cheers the mind, health renovates the frame;
     Disease and pleasure cease to mingle here,
     Reason and passion cease to combat there;
     Whilst mind unfettered o'er the earth extends               465
     Its all-subduing energies, and wields
     The sceptre of a vast dominion there.

       Mild is the slow necessity of death:
     The tranquil spirit fails beneath its grasp,
     Without a groan, almost without a fear,                     470
     Resigned in peace to the necessity,
     Calm as a voyager to some distant land,
     And full of wonder, full of hope as he.
     The deadly germs of languor and disease
     Waste in the human frame, and Nature gifts                  475
     With choicest boons her human worshippers.
     How vigorous now the athletic form of age!
     How clear its open and unwrinkled brow!
     Where neither avarice, cunning, pride, or care,
     Had stamped the seal of grey deformity                      480
     On all the mingling lineaments of time.
     How lovely the intrepid front of youth!
     How sweet the smiles of taintless infancy.

       Within the massy prison's mouldering courts,
     Fearless and free the ruddy children play,                  485
     Weaving gay chaplets for their innocent brows
     With the green ivy and the red wall-flower,
     That mock the dungeon's unavailing gloom;
     The ponderous chains, and gratings of strong iron,
     There rust amid the accumulated ruins                       490
     Now mingling slowly with their native earth:
     There the broad beam of day, which feebly once
     Lighted the cheek of lean captivity
     With a pale and sickly glare, now freely shines
     On the pure smiles of infant playfulness:                   495
     No more the shuddering voice of hoarse despair
     Peals through the echoing vaults, but soothing notes
     Of ivy-fingered winds and gladsome birds
     And merriment are resonant around.

       The fanes of Fear and Falsehood hear no more              500
     The voice that once waked multitudes to war
     Thundering thro' all their aisles: but now respond
     To the death dirge of the melancholy wind:
     It were a sight of awfulness to see
     The works of faith and slavery, so vast,                    505
     So sumptuous, yet withal so perishing!
     Even as the corpse that rests beneath their wall.
     A thousand mourners deck the pomp of death
     To-day, the breathing marble glows above
     To decorate its memory, and tongues                         510
     Are busy of its life: to-morrow, worms
     In silence and in darkness seize their prey.
     These ruins soon leave not a wreck behind:
     Their elements, wide-scattered o'er the globe,
     To happier shapes are moulded, and become                   515
     Ministrant to all blissful impulses:
     Thus human things are perfected, and earth,
     Even as a child beneath its mother's love,
     Is strengthened in all excellence, and grows
     Fairer and nobler with each passing year.                   520

       Now Time his dusky pennons o'er the scene
     Closes in steadfast darkness, and the past
     Fades from our charmed sight. My task is done:
     Thy lore is learned. Earth's wonders are thine own,
     With all the fear and all the hope they bring.              525
     My spells are past: the present now recurs.
     Ah me! a pathless wilderness remains
     Yet unsubdued by man's reclaiming hand.

       Yet, human Spirit, bravely hold thy course,
     Let virtue teach thee firmly to pursue                      530
     The gradual paths of an aspiring change:
     For birth and life and death, and that strange state
     Before the naked powers that thro' the world
     Wander like winds have found a human home,
     All tend to perfect happiness, and urge                     535
     The restless wheels of being on their way,
     Whose flashing spokes, instinct with infinite life,
     Bicker and burn to gain their destined goal:
     For birth but wakes the universal mind
     Whose mighty streams might else in silence flow             540
     Thro' the vast world, to individual sense
     Of outward shows, whose unexperienced shape
     New modes of passion to its frame may lend;
     Life is its state of action, and the store
     Of all events is aggregated there                           545
     That variegate the eternal universe;
     Death is a gate of dreariness and gloom,
     That leads to azure isles and beaming skies
     And happy regions of eternal hope.
     Therefore, O Spirit! fearlessly bear on:                    550
     Though storms may break the primrose on its stalk,
     Though frosts may blight the freshness of its bloom,
     Yet spring's awakening breath will woo the earth,
     To feed with kindliest dews its favourite flower,
     That blooms in mossy banks and darksome glens,              555
     Lighting the green wood with its sunny smile.

       Fear not then, Spirit, death's disrobing hand,
     So welcome when the tyrant is awake,
     So welcome when the bigot's hell-torch flares;
     'Tis but the voyage of a darksome hour,                     560
     The transient gulf-dream of a startling sleep.
     For what thou art shall perish utterly,
     But what is thine may never cease to be;
     Death is no foe to virtue: earth has seen
     Love's brightest roses on the scaffold bloom,               565
     Mingling with freedom's fadeless laurels there,
     And presaging the truth of visioned bliss.
     Are there not hopes within thee, which this scene
     Of linked and gradual being has confirmed?
     Hopes that not vainly thou, and living fires                570
     Of mind as radiant and as pure as thou,
     Have shone upon the paths of men--return,
     Surpassing Spirit, to that world, where thou
     Art destined an eternal war to wage
     With tyranny and falsehood, and uproot                      575
     The germs of misery from the human heart.
     Thine is the hand whose piety would soothe
     The thorny pillow of unhappy crime,
     Whose impotence an easy pardon gains,
     Watching its wanderings as a friend's disease:              580
     Thine is the brow whose mildness would defy
     Its fiercest rage, and brave its sternest will,
     When fenced by power and master of the world.
     Thou art sincere and good; of resolute mind,
     Free from heart-withering custom's cold control,            585
     Of passion lofty, pure and unsubdued.
     Earth's pride and meanness could not vanquish thee,
     And therefore art thou worthy of the boon
     Which thou hast now received: virtue shall keep
     Thy footsteps in the path that thou hast trod,              590
     And many days of beaming hope shall bless
     Thy spotless life of sweet and sacred love.
     Go, happy one, and give that bosom joy
       Whose sleepless spirit waits to catch
       Light, life and rapture from thy smile.                   595

       The Daemon called its winged ministers.
     Speechless with bliss the Spirit mounts the car,
     That rolled beside the crystal battlement,
     Bending her beamy eyes in thankfulness.
       The burning wheels inflame                                600
     The steep descent of Heaven's untrodden way.
       Fast and far the chariot flew:
       The mighty globes that rolled
     Around the gate of the Eternal Fane
     Lessened by slow degrees, and soon appeared                 605
     Such tiny twinklers as the planet orbs
     That ministering on the solar power
     With borrowed light pursued their narrower way.
       Earth floated then below:
       The chariot paused a moment;                              610
       The Spirit then descended:
       And from the earth departing
       The shadows with swift wings
     Speeded like thought upon the light of Heaven.

       The Body and the Soul united then,                        615
     A gentle start convulsed Ianthe's frame:
     Her veiny eyelids quietly unclosed;
     Moveless awhile the dark blue orbs remained:
     She looked around in wonder and beheld
     Henry, who kneeled in silence by her couch,                 620
     Watching her sleep with looks of speechless love,
       And the bright beaming stars
       That through the casement shone.


I
THE DARK AGES


   MEN call you "dark."  What factory then blurred the light
   Of golden suns, when nothing blacker than the shades
   Of coming rain climbed up the heather-mantled height?
                  While the air
      Breathed all the scents of all untrodden flowers,
      And brooks poured silver through the glimmering glades,
         Then sweetly wound through virgin ground.
            Must all that beauty pass?
            And must our pleasure trains
   Like foul eruptions belch upon the mountain head?
      Must we perforce build vulgar villa lanes,
            And on sweet fields of grass
   The canting scutcheons of a cheating commerce spread?

   Men call you "dark."  Did that faith see with cobwebbed eyes,
   That built the airy octagon on Ely's hill,
   And Gloucester's Eastern wall that woos the topaz skies,
                  Where the hymn
         Angelic "Glory be to God on high,
         And peace on earth to men who feel good will,"
            Might softly sound God's throne around?
               Is that a perfect faith
               Which pew-filled chapels rears,
      Where Gothic fronts of stone mask backs of ill-baked bricks,
         And where the frothy fighting preacher fears,
               As peasants fear a wraith,
   His deacon's frown or some just change in politics?

   Men call you "dark."  Was Chaucer's speech a muddy stream,
   The language born of Norman sun and Saxon snow?
   Was Langland's verse or Wyclif's prose mere glow-worm's gleam?
                  And the tales
         Of Arthur's sword and of the holy Grail,
         And Avalon, the isle where no storms blow:
            From such romance did no light glance?
               Have we not heard a tongue,
               Whose words the Saxon thralls
      Would scorn to speak above their muck-rake and their fork,
         The speech of barrack-rooms and music-halls,
               Where every fool has flung
   The rotten refuse of Calcutta and New York?

   Men call you "dark."  But _chivalry_ and _honour_ stand
   As words that you, not we, did fashion, when the need
   Of food beyond the price of gold awoke our land.
                  For you taught
         Inconstancy is like a standard lost;
         And we who prove untrue in love or deed
            Will doubly shame an ancient name.
               Your robes were not all white,
               Your soul was not a sea
      Where all the crystal rivulets of God found room:
         But we must often to your lessons flee,
               Our truth with yours unite,
   Before we meet the holy dayspring of the doom.




II
THE BELLS OF VENICE


   RING out again that faltering strain,
         Cease not so soon,
   Sweet peal that brought to me the thought
   Of some deep shadowed English lane
         Across the blue lagoon.

   The water street where oarsmen meet
         And shout ahead,
   The glowing quay, all noise and glee,
   Seemed hallowed as when angels' feet
         Touched Jacob's stony bed.

   On pearly dome and princely home
         Day's glory dies:
   Once more the bells' low murmur tells
   That faith is not a line of foam
         Nor life a bridge of sighs.




III
AN ANCIENT CHURCH


   SO little dost thou seem of common earth,
   So much of spirit doth thy fabric show,
   That we, who watch thee through the azure glow,
   Might deem that with the stars thou cam'st to birth.

   So sweet and true the voices from thy spire,
   Which bless the day's betrothal unto night,
   That when they falter with the fading light,
   We well might think an angel touched his lyre.

   If chiselled stone and molten bronze instil
   Hopes deeper than the fountains of my tears,
   And love that hungers for eternity,

   God, I believe Thou hast some use for me;
   Leave me no life of dumb and sluggard years,
   But cut or melt me till I speak Thy will.




IV
TO THE ENGLISH GIPSIES {6}


               ROUGH swarthy Gipsy folk,
   Would that my voice could once forget to falter,
      And sing a song as free as swallows' wings
      Of ancient Gipsies, and their "dukes" and "kings,"
   The men who braved the branding-rod and halter,
      Because like birds they nimbly came and went,
      And loved the stars and road, and crouching tent
            Beneath a grove of oak.

                  In ages long ago
   The Brahman priests pursued you with their curses,
      Because you found life sweeter at the core
      Without the mumbling of their magic lore.
   And you have lived to see their Sanskrit verses
      Fall dead; and Brahmans, like mere Romany,
      Now tempt their gods by trusting to the sea,
            Though trembling while they go.

            Then hardened against fear
   You looted caravans of gold-shot dresses
      And gems upon their way to bright Baghdad,
      And drove the Moslem Khalif rampant mad,
   When pearls culled from the ocean for the tresses
      Of his Circassian, in your pouches fell,
      As trifles to adorn the dusky shell
            Of some black virgin's ear.

                  Next Greece and Thessaly
   Became the home of many a jocund roamer,
      Who gaily danced, or begged with mien forlorn,
      And patched his Indian speech where it was torn
   With remnants from Demosthenes and Homer,
      Until you struck your blackened tents again
      And tattered pageants crossed the endless plain
            Of fertile Hungary.

            'Tis even said you planned
   To trick the Pope with penitential moaning,
      And gained his leave to wander seven years
      Towards the melancholy North, with tears
   The sin of feigned apostasy atoning:
      Thus fortified against enquiring foes,
      You, with the budding of the Tudor rose,
            Alighted on our land.

            Who says it was not good
   To see your handkerchiefs of red and yellow,
      And silver rings and basket-laden carts,
      And hear the honey-lipped prophetic arts
   Of wheedling witches, or a clean-limbed fellow
      Who fiddled by the hedgerow in the smoke,
      And roused the antique Gipsy song that woke
            The silence of the wood?

            Now that your blood must fail,
   What artist soul revengefully remembers
      You raided the domain of chanticleer,
      Or deftly poisoned pigs to swell your cheer
   Of hedgehogs cooked in clay amid the embers?
      Who says you sometimes wedded art to force,
      Or made the worse appear the better horse
            Before a coming sale?

            You soon will pass away;
   Laid one by one below the village steeple
      You face the East from which your fathers sprang,
      Or sleep in moorland turf, beyond the clang
   Of towns and fairs; your tribes have joined the people
      Whom no true Romany will call by name,
      The folk departed like the camp-fire flame
            Of withered yesterday.




V
AUTUMN DYING


   AUTUMN shakes in golden raiment,
         Gashed with red;
   None can ransom him by payment
         From the dead.

   They have shorn his strength with reaping,
         Left him cold;
   Now he wakes each morning weeping,
         Weak and old.

   And last night he sought my casement,
         Came and fled;
   Wailed for aid from roof to basement,
         Touched my bed.

   Though I cannot find his ransom,
         Ere he dies;
   I will pay all that I can--some
         Hopes and sighs.




VI
THE DEPARTURE FOR CYTHERA


      ERE they parted for Cythera
         When the spring had reached its bloom,
      Phyllis, Doris and Neaera
         Peeped into their pictured room,
      Wished to go, yet wished to linger,
      Lifted each a taper finger,
   Threw a kiss towards their portraits set in walls of rose brocade.

      Where the beeches lift a curtain
         Over shifting sunlit scenes,
      They with footsteps light and certain
         Used to dance like fairy queens;
      Now they speed beneath the beeches
      Till the path the water reaches
   And the bay just softly ripples by a marble balustrade.

      Purple were the sails that beckoned
         And the deck was ivory,
      Love stood smiling there and reckoned
         His embarking company;
      Every mast wore silver sheathing,
      Music in the air was breathing,
   In the rigging little laughing cupids upwards climbed and strayed.

      On they sailed through fields of azure,
         White was all their furrowed way,
      Melting in a blue erasure,
         Melting fast like yesterday;
      Radiant Hope still steered them hoping,
      Steered them past the woodlands sloping,
   Where the doves descend and flutter on an ancient colonnade.

      On they passed through golden hazes,
         Watching distant peaks of snow,
      On through shadowed island mazes,
         Where the dreamy spices blow;
      Till the moon herself was setting,
      And the dew fell fast and wetting,
   And the silver masts no image on the blackening waves displayed.

      Frayed are now the rose-red panels
         Filled with squares of rare brocade,
      In the ceiling Time carves channels
         Where the frescoes slowly fade;
      Chipped are now the scrolls of plaster,
      Which a skilled Italian master
   Moulded all along the cornice, and with tips of gold o'erlaid.

      But the shallow oval spaces
         Underneath the white festoons,
      Hold the tender pastel faces
         Waiting endless afternoons;
      For they never touched Cythera,
      Phyllis, Doris, and Neaera,
   And again they never landed by the marble balustrade.




VII
THE VILLAGE CHERUB


   UP at the church at the edge of the moor,
   Flat on the pathway that leads to the door,
   Worn by the tread of the mourning and poor,
   There is a face that is fit for God's floor.

   How could a mason create in his brain
   Just such a cherub to sob in the rain?
   How could the pride of the dying but vain
   Want such a cherub to blow a refrain?

   This one had ankles with which he could run--
   Is it a fact that a cherub has none?
   This one had love-locks that flashed in the sun,
   Yes, and his lips often pouted in fun.

   Who was the angel that played on the street;
   Whose was the face I can't soil with my feet?
   Nobody knows; but I hope I shall meet
   One such a cherub in front of God's seat.




VIII
LADY DAY NEAR BIGNOR


   SOUTH-EASTWARD where the waving line of hills
   Bears up the clouds that speed like passing boats,
   On one sweet spot which distant sunlight fills
   A sudden silver haze descends and floats.

   The trees below like lace veil glistening streams,
   The gorse puts on its tiny gloves of gold,
   The cattle move as though they fed in dreams,
   And timid lambs are bleating in the fold.

   Though tangled bracken like an old man's beard
   Blends autumn's ruddy brown with winter's grey,
   Soft blows the breeze that through the pines is heard,
   Green moss and yellow primrose deck the way.

   The Roman villa level on the grass,
   With wrestling cupids on the floor within;
   The church where first a Norman priest said mass,
   The ivied chimneys of the Georgian inn:

   These have their message.  All things tell the change
   Of seasons, races, and of man's estate:
   All bid us mark within how small a range
   There moves a story tragically great.

   The hills abide, and that mysterious Breath
   Which brooded on the slowly shaping earth,
   And came to-day like dew to Nazareth
   To fashion our Redeemer's Virgin-birth.




IX
A COTTAGE INSCRIPTION


   "TIME trieth troth."  Who carved the text
   Above the narrow cottage door?
   Two hundred years of storm have vexed
   The words which front the western moor.

   Was it a hind who loved the king
   That held his court beyond the sea,
   A hind who taught his child to sing
   Of Stuart rose and Stuart tree?

   Was it a swain whose soul adored
   A maid who went to London town?
   And did she choose some spangled lord
   And coldly flout her country clown?

   "Time trieth troth."  And was he true
   Whose chisel carved that rugged line?
   And was he loyal till the yew
   O'erarched his heart's now silent shrine?

   Then, though bereft of king or love,
   He found the poet's secret gain,
   The sympathy of suns above,
   The friendship of the falling rain.




X
A MEMORY OF IRELAND


   WHERE the saints of Holy Ireland sleep
      No chancels pen them round,
   But the waving trees their vigils keep
      Above each verdant mound.

   Here they climbed no lofty marble beds
      To find a frigid rest,
   But a canopy of golden threads
      Hangs o'er them in the west.

   When the larks have ceased their thankful hymn,
      The ocean booms his bell,
   And the lamps of heaven swing o'er the rim
      Of every holy well.

   May the Lord bring back that race of men
      Whom charity enticed
   To desert the world for some poor glen
      And give the people Christ.




XI
"TIR NAN OG" {19}


   WHEN thou didst die, they say a fairy's pipe
      Was heard outside the castle door,
   And wee folk thick as August corn that's ripe
      Came trooping down the moor,
   And bore thy soul with laughter and with light
      O'er glen and heathered height.

   Friends waked thee till the dawn thrice slanted by
      To quench the tapers round thy bier,
   And countless decades of the rosary
      They numbered with a tear;
   But yet they whispered, "She is now a queen,
      And clad in rainbow green."

   They set thy form near blessed Finnan's side,
      And wailed the Gaelic death-lament;
   But they believed thee happy as a bride
      With long-dreamed joys content
   Within the land they name with wistful tongue,
      "The land where all are young."




XII
A HIGHLAND DAY
WITHIN SIGHT OF CULLODEN


   THE snow-white borders of the grey-green sea
   Peep through the mist that veils the strait with dew,
   The sun grows bold and smites the landscape free,
   The burn, the woods, the rocks of rose-red hue.

   The world lies warm upon the heart of day,
   The callants push their boat from off the shore,
   The white gulls sail and flutter through the bay,
   The jet-black daws are calling evermore.

   The doves fly wheeling past their mountain wall,
   The whispering pine trees weave a ceiling cool,
   The rowans redden o'er the foaming fall,
   The ferns keep guard around the fairies' pool.

   The distant moorland where the tribesmen bled
   To win their wandering prince a royal home,
   Now wraps a deeper purple on their bed,
   While he sleeps cold below St. Peter's dome.

   The waves turn opal in the waning light,
   The rocks exchange for grey their rose-red bloom,
   The finite sinks into the infinite,
   And sea and sky are wedded in the gloom.




XIII
TO THE FIRS


   I LOVE the oak-grove where the Druid's knife
   Cut down the mistletoe in days of old;
   I love the elms around the convent fold
   Where souls escape the dust of highway life.

   I love to watch the tiny milk-white spires
   That on the chestnut branches lift their head;
   I love to see the rowan growing red
   With clusters bright as frosty winter fires.

   But better still I love you, firs that crest
   The lonely hill above the moaning firth,
   Beside the path where bluebells gently nod.

   To your grey arms, ere sunset leaves the West,
   I can confide each sorrow at its birth,
   For you have known the waves and storms of God.




XIV
GOOD-BYE


   SING me one more villanelle,
   Light as elfin foot that brushes
   Through the ferns and foxgloves of the fairy dell.

   Come where woodland spices smell,
   Where the wild rose faintly flushes,
   Sing me one more villanelle.

   Rare as snowy heather bell,
   Sweet as melody of thrushes
   Through the ferns and foxgloves of the fairy dell.

   When the shade creeps up the fell
   Mid the parting sun's last blushes,
   Sing me one more villanelle.

   Sing it to the curfew knell,
   Where the streamlet plays with rushes
   Through the ferns and foxgloves of the fairy dell.

   Let it breathe no sad farewell,
   Only mirth with silent hushes.
   Sing me one more villanelle
   Through the ferns and foxgloves of the fairy dell.




XV
THE FAIRY GLEN REVISITED


         THAT pure and shy retreat
         A Tartar would have spared,
   But not that lawyer cur from Inverness,
   Who thought its sylvan virgin loveliness
      Would bring him gold if rudely bared
         And hawked upon the street.

         There children checked their race
         And crept on tiptoed feet,
   Lest they should break upon the rainbow rings
   Of fairies glinting through transparent wings,
      Or kindly wizard come to meet
         A maid with lovelorn face.

         No snow nor stinging sleet
         Could chill the fairies' bath;
   So close the vaulting was with fir and larch
   Which laid deep carpets underneath their arch,
      That on the fairies' silent path
         No blast could ever beat.

         Mid foam more white than fleece
         The waterfall rang sweet,
   It made each rocky cup a rippling well,
   It coyly dived and peeped along the dell,
      Then ran the rising sea to greet,
         And greeting found its peace.

         And now the cold and heat
         Scourge all the glen with ire;
   The broken boughs have choked the sobbing stream,
   The silver birch is but a sodden beam,
      The fairies' path is sunk in mire,
         The moss has left their seat.

         Flash sorrow and disdain
         For this most sordid feat,
   You whom Burns taught to love a daisy's face,
   And Scott to love the mountains' gloom and grace;
      Or say they scattered chaff for wheat,
         And sang their songs in vain.




XVI
WAITING


                    BASED ON THE GAELIC FEAR A' BHATA

         THE year may change its time,
            But still I climb
         The cliff above the sea,
   And look with eyes half dim with rain,
   To know if God has brought again
         My lover back to me.

         When darkness downward glides
            And slowly hides
         The fading hills of blue,
   I never bar the cottage door
   Without one look across the moor,
         A look of hope for you.

         Sometimes when I am free
            I seek the quay
         Soon after break of day,
   And find a newly harboured boat,
   And ask if you are still afloat
         Near home or far away.

         I ask if you are well,
            And they can tell
         My heart is set on you:
   And then they call me just a fool,
   A baby in the world's hard school
         To give you love so true.

         You promised me silk gowns
            From Lowland towns,
         And rings of twisted gold;
   And, best of all, your picture bound
   With stones to hem its beauty round
         That I might kiss and hold.

         My love is not the flower
            Of one short hour;
         You were my childhood's pride;
   Your image is my dream by night,
   By day if ever put to flight
         It comes back like the tide.

         The swan upon the lake
            When robbers take
         Her young, is left to moan;
   None tends her wounds or heeds her cry,
   She wails her loss and waits to die:
         Like her I cry alone.




XVII
NEAR HAARLEM


   TRIUMPHANTLY it soars, that full-domed sky,
   Of lucent turquoise fading into pearl;
   And here the happy birds their brown wings furl
   By waters that lisp seaward dreamily.

   Beyond these plains of silver and of green,
   Amid the floating vapours of the town
   The vast grey church uplifts its belfry crown,
   A chiselled shrine through incense dimly seen.

   The burdened barges trust the smiling flood,
   Calm wraps the distance of reclining dunes,
   The tower rings peace in soft alternate tones.

   And who that hears the bells' low luting tunes,
   Now thinks of Haarlem's siege and starving moans,
   Or how these brooks once bubbled with brave blood?




XVIII
THE TOMB OF ST. AUGUSTINE AT PAVIA


   BENEATH the low barbaric Lombard apse
   It rises like a ridge of Alpine snow,
   And wry-wheeled ages with uneasy lapse
      Creak past its majesty, and go.

   Such music as leaves Milan's marble spires
   To mount towards a greater whiter throne,
   Or tempts to earth again seraphic choirs,
      Is at Augustine's shrine unknown.

   No wave of pilgrim footsteps surges here,
   No sheaf of tapers lifts its votive gleam,
   The half-taught critic comes not with his sneer,
      When I draw nigh, dear saint, to dream.

   Enough if far-off sounds of children's glee
   Bid me to "take and read" God's open call,
   Or some sad Monnica pray here to see
      Her son, like thee, a second Paul.




XIX
MODERN FLORENCE


   HARD by the home of Dante's infant life
   I saw a Yankee "Kake Walk" advertised;
   Within San Miniato's pillared aisle
   A Japanese was peering unsurprised;
   Where Michelangelo set "Dawn" and "Night,"
   And her, most blest, whose softly sculptured smile
   Glows with a maiden's and a mother's light,
   A German Jew was nagging with his wife.




XX
TO DANTE


   THE Church divided and the Empire fell,
   Grave Dante, but thy verse in magic grows
   And charms men upward to the snow-white Rose
   Of heaven from the mire and grief of hell.

   No lonely isle of dull forgetfulness
   Hides Beatrice within its shadowed gloom,
   For 'mid the petals of thy Rose's bloom
   Time's hand has set that pearl of loveliness.

   Though patched and powdered poets could not taste
   Thy limpid sweetness, and exposed thy fame
   To meet the leering Frenchman's cynic air,

   Thy love was fair without brocade or paste,
   Thyself too great to need a gilded name;
   Thy Comedy and God survive Voltaire.




XXI
TO PETRARCH


   YES, Petrarch, we most certainly believe
   That you who wore your heart upon your sleeve,
   Did love your love for Laura, and the eye
   Of public fame, at which your sonnets fly,
   Like skyward larks that court the genial sun;
   And o'er the tears you treasured one by one
   You downward bent with all a statue's grace
   To see reflections of your tearful face.
   But none redeemed by love will e'er consent
   To say you tasted of love's sacrament.




XXII
TO A LADY OF
THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY


                           IN MEMORY OF METASTASIO

   NICE, though your lips of coral
      Now are dust;
   And the schoolboy scans the moral
   Graven on your broken bust

   In the gilt barocco chapel
      After Mass;
   Where ten coats with broidered lappel
   Bent when Nice used to pass.

   Still perchance your spirit hovers
      Where the lute
   And the voices of your lovers
   Chimed, but now are gone and mute.

   Where the lonely arbour's hollow
      Shadier grows,
   And the butterflies can follow
   Fearlessly to kiss the rose.

   And you smile because a poet
      A la mode
   Flouted you; and then, we know it,
   Wrote an abject palinode.

   For your hands, though light as feathers,
      Held him tight:
   Love was made to last all weathers,
   Not to change with day and night.




XXIII
THE "LIBERAL" DIVINE


   THE "middle path" meets every need,
      The Stagirite and Buddha say;
   I won't doubt more than half the creed
   Nor wear a costume wholly lay.




XXIV
THE QUARREL


                     SUGGESTED BY A PICTURE OF FRAGONARD

   ON the elm tree she was swinging,
      Just beyond the hedge of yew;
   But she slowly ceased from singing,
      From her breast a pink she drew.

   Buttoning his coat of satin,
      Off he strode towards the woods,
   Tartly quoting Virgil's Latin,
      That a woman's made of moods.

   Long ago within God's garden
      Both were wrapped in long lone sleep,
   Heeding not if hoar frosts harden,
      Or the autumn leaves fall deep.

   Laugh not at the statue calling
      Phyllis with her marble muff,
   Nor the marble cupids sprawling
      On a cloud of powder puff.

   Laugh not at his hermit fashions
      Nor the book unwarmed by hope;
   Say not that it shows the passions
      Of a stony misanthrope.

   For they loved while they were living,
      Loved with love untold, unheard;
   Though they parted unforgiving,
      Each too proud to say a word.




XXV
THE OLD FOUNTAIN


   ONE gay glint of rose and silver flounces
         In a deep green dell,
   Where a streamlet bubbles down and bounces
         From a Triton's mossy shell.

   One more dance ere sunset on the mountain
         Laughing says, "Too late";
   One sweet lute that tinkled with the fountain
         Called two hearts to court their fate.

   Some small raindrops, just to tease the Triton,
         Mischievously fell;
   Some one spoke a jest that quenched the light on
         Eyes that he had long loved well.

   That dark night he cursed the love he brought her,
         Though it made his soul;
   And she sobbed an echo to the water
         Brimming in the fountain bowl.




XXVI
LOVE AND DEATH


   ONCE toward a sunlit garden, laden
      With the lime trees' scented breath,
   Came to watch a merry youth and maiden,
            Love and Death.

   At their bosoms Love threw fragrant posies,
      Tossed them laughing low and blithe,
   In the background Death amid the roses
            Moved his scythe.

   Ere the latest rose the path was strewing,
      Her sweet maiden soul was fled;
   He beside her grave his cheeks bedewing,
            Bent his head.

   Sobbing Love then thought to give him pleasure,
      Bade his curse on Death attend;
   But the youth begged Death who held his treasure
            Be his friend.

   Death as friend might give the old completeness
      Time could give to him no more,
   Death, not Love alone, the former sweetness
            Might restore.

   Love then saw the youth was worthier loving,
      Dowered with a stronger grace;
   And with downcast eyelids shyly moving,
            Kissed Death's face.




XXVII
VIOLETS


         WHERE burning tapers hold
   White suppliant hands from arms of gold
   Around the Host; there no one sets
            Sweet violets.

         Fair roses droop and die
   In halls of dance and minstrelsy;
   But who within those walls has met
            The violet?

   Where faintly smiles the sun
      Through chequered skies on beech groves dun,
   There hides in vales sequestered yet
            The violet.

   Where I shall lie asleep,
      Some friend, perhaps, a tear will weep,
   And if our love knew no regrets,
            Strew violets.




XXVIII
THE GARDENS OF THE SOUL


   IN a restless land beside a river
      Stands a stone enclosure tall,
   Rich the finder is, and rich the giver
      Of the key to pierce that wall.

   Once within, you drink the clearest pleasures,
      And your sorrow change for ease;
   Ancient bards enchant you with their measures,
      Sweetly sighs the Highland breeze.

   Next amid the orange trees and cedars
      Bearded Homer deigns to roam,
   Musing tales of marching Argive leaders,
      And Ulysses welcomed home.

   Here where daffodils their crowns are bending
      On a lawn of English green,
   Milton gravely sits to tell the ending
      Of angelic strifes unseen.

   Here the almond bloom for ever blushes,
      And Italian fountains rise;
   While the wine of dawn their dewdrops flushes,
      Dante speaks of Paradise.

   But beyond where any poet paces,
      Grows a gnarled grey olive grove,
   Where the furthest stars have veiled their faces,
      Weeping for eternal Love.




XXIX
A MAN TO CHILDISH THINGS


   WHERE are the domes of pure mysterious gold,
   And myriad angel wings in ordered flight
   My childish gaze could once at eve behold
   Before the mountains melted into night?

   Where is the island, shy abode of bliss,
   Which seemed through summer haze to rise and float,
   The isle which merchant fleets could never kiss,
   But once stood still for Brendan's hermit boat?

   Where are my paladins with souls of snow,
   Whose swords were fashioned at no mortal forge,
   The men who rode where Arthur bade them go
   To meet the dragon in his dungeon gorge?

   O happy, happy dreams, ye were no lies,
   No true apostle made me put away
   Such "childish things," which mirrored to mine eyes
   Faith, Hope and Love.  I call you back to stay.




XXX
THE KNIGHT


   HE was so courteous to the paynim horde,
      Men doubted if he served the Lord
         Or held the faith of Christ.
   They said he proudly scorned life's sweetest prize,
      Who never played with sparkling eyes
         Or kept an evening tryst.

   Their god of love was but Cupidity,
      Their Lord an idol vanity
         With mail below his vest:
   While he, true knight, believed in Christ alone,
      And though they thought his heart a stone,
         Made love a hero's quest.




XXXI
HOPES


      TO have lived just like a man
         And done what one man can,
   Not basking like a dog in summer dust;
      Nor like a butterfly
         That flaunts and flutters by,
   Till showers have dimmed its silver wings with rust.

      To have lightened some stiff load
         Of men upon the road--
   May some remember I am flesh and blood!
      To have dried some children's tears,
         And slain some women's fears
   That bid them crouch beneath a brooding flood.

      To have known the throbbing stars,
         And traced the ancient scars
   That streams have ploughed upon the mountain side;
      To have sung songs passing sweet,
         And sung with lasting heat
   As pure as that of stars that burn and bide.

      To have said the simply true,
         Although to preach the new
   Might win me prizes and the world's caress;
      To have been misunderstood,
         If so the common good
   Might bear more harvest through my loneliness.

      To have learnt that love is light
         In rain and fog and night,
   For eyes that sadly peer and feet that plod:
      To have found all life a song
         Of rapture calm and strong,
   And found the music of the song was God.




XXXII
THE PATH


   TO buzzing lecture halls his steps he bent,
   Where all the paths to God were well discussed,
   Or faith and reason weighed with balance just,
   Till he was dizzy with strong argument.
   He saw philosophers who shook their fists,
         And broke commandment nine;
   He saw the Sadducean alchemists
         Draw water out of wine;
      He saw the knife-eyed Pharisees
      Adjusting their phylacteries:
   But never found the gate where he could see
            The One in Three.

   He watched the hills as dawn unlocked the day,
   And felt vibrating o'er the low green lea
   The breath of lilac and of hawthorn tree,
   While gold laburnums rocked each pendent spray.
   He saw the sun salute the moon afar,
         And felt their common soul;
   He heard the song of star to sister star
         Around the sky's deep bowl;
      He watched the waves withdraw their foam,
      He watched the rivers wending home:
   He found the One, and yet he could not see
            The One in Three.

   Still doubting he beheld a brother man,
   Whom he ignored and scorned to think akin;
   But now a sudden breath of love within
   Drove him to serve, and humbly he began.
   His hands that worked in love were torn with red,
         He shrank not at the sight,
   For he who suffered saw a Heart that bled
         Become his beacon-light.
      Thus brother to the Son of God
      With life from heaven on earth he trod:
   The Life, the Light, the Love, he knew to be
            The One in Three.




XXXIII
THE CALL TO BETHLEHEM


   SHEPHERDS, come to Bethlehem,
   Pluck yon bush of Christmas rose,
   Weave a dainty diadem.

   From my flute with tuneful stem
   Music warbles as it flows,
   "Shepherds, come to Bethlehem."

   Lo, upon the mountain's hem
   Ruby clouds above the snows
   Weave a dainty diadem.

   Seek not proud Jerusalem,
   Where the empty temple shows;
   Shepherds, come to Bethlehem.

   Christ without a crown or gem
   Lies on straw while winter blows;
   Weave a dainty diadem.

   Christ will not our gift condemn;
   All our poverty He knows.
   Shepherds, come to Bethlehem,
   Weave a dainty diadem.




XXXIV
A CHRISTMAS LULLABY


                          ADAPTED FROM THE SPANISH

               STARS,
   Stay your bright amethyst cars,
            Flee not away,
            Wait till the day,
            Come and adore.

               Flowers,
   Born in the morning's first hours,
            Stars of the earth,
            Bloom for Christ's birth,
            Come and adore.

               Birds,
   Songs are far fresher than words,
            Christ is your Sun,
            Sing every one,
            Come and adore.

               Streams,
   Whisper in tune with Christ's dreams,
            Throw your sweet spells
            From crystal bells,
            Come and adore.

               Breeze,
   Say to all lands and all seas,
            "This merry morn,
            Jesus is born,
            Come and adore."

               Child,
   Seeking the lost on the wild,
            Though Thou dost sleep,
            Smile on thy sheep
            Come to adore.




XXXV
TO THE HOLY CHILD


                            AS PAINTED BY RAPHAEL

   O LORD, Thyself hast taught that sight is not belief;
         And yet within Thine eyes I see eternity,
      The love which told the dying thief
      That he should rest in Paradise
   Is there, though Thou art still a Child at Mary's knee;
      The joy of perfect sacrifice
      Is there, and that unfathomed grief
   In which our griefs have sunk like tears in one wide sea.




XXXVI
MATER AMABILIS


                          AS PAINTED BY BOTTICELLI

   MARY, on the Prince of peace thy gladness
         Gleams from radiant eyes;
   But their light is touched with passing sadness,
      Like our English summer skies.

   Angels' arms above thy head are holding
         Crowns of golden stars;
   But the baby hands thy breast enfolding
      Show to thee their future scars.

   Lilies cense thee with their exhalations,
         But thy heart has guessed
   Slanders of the scoffing generations
      Who will call thee cursed, not blessed.

   So when clouds of faint foreboding sorrow
         From an unknown sea
   Come to warn me of a broken morrow,
      Mother Mary, pray for me.




XXXVII
SAINT STEPHEN


         I SEE that I must die.
   O Christ, how shall I bear the cruel stones,
   E'en though there be a place among the thrones
   At thy right hand for me?  Create again
      The very sinews of my soul:
      I ask not for an aureole,
         But strength to brave the pain.

         Help me, for life is dear:
   The growing rapture of the summer morn,
   The cedared hills, and soft-cheeked roses born
   Within the cooling breath of Hermon's snow,
      The rare reluctant shaded streams,
      The sea that sings, and weeps, and dreams;
         I love them: Thou dost know.

         I loved my father's faith:
   The synagogue with all its sacred gear,
   The feasts that guard the march of every year,
   The trumpets, lamps, and waving of the palms,
      The azure fringe on robes like milk,
      The yellow scrolls wrapped round with silk,
         The triumph of the Psalms.

         I loved to preach the truth,
   To thrust and parry in a fair debate,
   To trace God's dayspring in His nation's fate,
   To lift up Christ, who dying broke death's bands;
      I loved to give men joy for sighs,
      To win the thanks of widows' eyes,
         And children's trustful hands.

         "The truth."  Yes, I will die.
   This chafing Sanhedrin shall not prevail
   To check me.  They shall see the truth full-sail;
   They cannot sink truth, stone me though they can.
      Lord, I am ready.  By thy grace
      No shade of fear shall cross my face,
         And I will play the man.




XXXVIII
SAINT JOHN AT EPHESUS


      MEN ask why I am left alone:
   My brother, James, and Peter, all are slain;
   Brave men who met the surging crimson deep
   With equal minds.  And Mary fell asleep,
   His mother whom He gave me for my own.
      But I with anchored hope remain.

      I loved Him.  It is long ago
   Since I with Mary stood upon the hill
   Where His last breath rose up in Sacrifice,
   While tears fell earthward from our burning eyes,
   And Jews were gibing on the slope below.
      And yet I know He loves me still.

      He loved me.  And whene'er I dream
   Of sunsets changing into glassy gold
   The waters of the Galilean lake,
   Or see in thought the Temple portals take
   A pearly softness from the moonlight gleam,
      He speaks with me, as once of old.

      I love Him, for He first loved me.
   He let me lean upon His holy breast,
   He brought me first to view His empty grave;
   He bade me learn that only love can save,
   And call no fire from heaven but charity.
      I work and wait, for He knows best.

      That Rome which now oppresses us,
   And all this rout of grey idolatry
   Shall soon dissolve.  For I can see the Light
   Which guides the sun disperse the Asian night:
   And straight above the reek of Ephesus
      There burns the Love which died for me.




XXXIX
THE LITTLE CHILDREN


   ALONG the ocean's stormless side,
   Below the never setting sun,
   Where Innocent is every one,
   Meet all Christ's babes that ever died.

   Some home around their Monarch's seat,
   Like doves that flutter to their rest;
   Within His arms they find their nest
   And wonder at His wounded feet.

   Some make a goal of Mary's knee,
   To which they run in joyous race;
   Then tell her that their mother's face
   On earth was just like hers to see.

   Some call the angels to their play
   Mid flowers of one unfading spring;
   In radiant wheels they move and sing,
   And learn the angels' roundelay.

   But some, I think, amid those bands,
   Remembering our ruder lore
   And love, towards this colder shore
   Lift speed-well eyes and rose-leaf hands.




XL
THE CIRCUMCISION


   MORE bright than rosebuds on the rounded base
      Of some veined alabaster urn,
      Wherein a lamp was set to burn
   And throw false smiles on Aphrodite's face.

   More bright than crowns of red anemones,
      Which every flushing Syrian year
      Saw laid upon Adonis' bier
   By mourning maidens on adoring knees.

   More brightly flashed the drops of precious blood,
      The rubies linked upon the shrine
      Of Christ the Babe, the Christ divine,
   To seal His body for the holy rood.




XLI
THE RETURN OF THE MAGI


   HOW they did laugh, when mounting our camels
      Three of us rode, obeying the light;
   Slowly we cut our hearts from the trammels
      Doubt flung around us that first wistful night.
         Only a star above wind and rain,
         Only a bloom on the passionless plain,
         Waving us onward; yet we were right.
               We thank Thee, Lord.

   Oft we recalled that kindly derision,
      Measuring seas of measureless sand,
   Mocked by the streams and trees of the vision
      Moving and melting at magic's command.
         Cheated and choked we quailed and burned,
         While the blast blew and the desert was churned,
         Slipping, it seemed, out of God's own hand.
               We praise Thee, Lord.

   Onward we rode, where silver-meshed rivers
      Sang to the birds which singing replied,
   Where the soft light through rose-bowers quivers,
      On past the voice of the bridegroom and bride.
         Seeking the desert and star again,
         Leaving the homesteads and fields of white grain
         Where the doves called us to dream and bide.
               We bless Thee, Lord.

   Onward we went, past temples that brighten,
      Sepulchres hiding souls that are dead,
   Chambers where bought lips wearily whiten,
      Altars and pavements with hecatombs red.
         Onward we travelled to Bethlehem,
         Guided from Zion, the earth's diadem,
         On to a stable and manger bed,
               To greet Thee, Lord.

   Dimly His eyes flashed, laden with presage,
      Telling of strife and triumph to be;
   Gracious His lips, and glowed with a message
      Merciful, strong to set prisoners free.
         Lord, use our myrrh and our urns of gold;
         Fairer than children of men to behold,
         Thine is the sceptre and victory!
               We worship Thee.




XLII
ATONEMENT


   WHAT love it was that Thou shouldst choose to feel
   The chill of valleys where no dawns emerge
   To break the mist, and streams repeat the dirge
   For faith crushed like a pearl beneath man's heel.

   How just it was that Thou our Judge shouldst learn
   The force of taunts that goad us into sin,
   And slowly aureoled perfection win
   Through blackened hopes, and through the stripes that burn.

   Thou who didst steel thy will to impotence,
   And wouldst not save Thyself, or take control
   Of force, make us so dead that we may live.

   Thou God of sorrows, wash our penitence,
   Thou who wast naked, help each smitten soul,
   Christ strong to suffer, stronger to forgive.




XLIII
CALVARY


   AS some weak bird, tossed homeward by the gale,
   Is safely nested in the rocky scar
   That cleaves the curving beach, but hears afar
   The ocean writhing at the tempest's flail,

   So thou, my soul, hast reached the refuge hill
   That Pilate made a pleasance for his jest,
   And in Christ's rose-red side hast found a rest,
   Borne half by passion, yet by conscious will.

   O Lord, whose spirit waged so hard a fight,
   Scorn not the tainted thing beside thy heart
   As too unfit to feel that sacred glow;

   But lest I ere forget how much I owe,
   Let not the vision utterly depart
   Of frenzied storm and all-engulfing night.




XLIV
"THE DESERT SHALL BLOSSOM"


   LONG, long ago He died, and yet He is not dead;
   From out His riven side and patient hands that bled
   Flows one unebbing tide, by love and pity fed.

   God's heart is satisfied, man's eyes are upward led,
   And o'er the desert wide, the dew that's downward shed
   Drawn from that flowing tide, forms flowers white and red.




XLV
RESURRECTION


   HOPE, last of all the angels, left the three
   Who with their woman's courage watched Christ die;
         But Hope, when she had fled,
   Returned to plant in them one humble flower,
   The thought that in His grey sepulchral bower
      They three might strew around the Dead
   The alms of one adoring sympathy,
         And pray a last good-bye.

   They sped in silence, but the sharp-fanged doubt
   Lurked in the path to mock their pungent store
         Of spices, hissing, "Nay,
   Ye cannot reach the Tenant of that gloom."
   But when the dawn and they retouched the tomb,
      They found the stone was rolled away,
   And He, their Life who died, now stood without,
         Alive for evermore.

   Thus when we seek our buried innocence
   With bitter myrrh and grey-leaved rosemary,
         And writhing doubts delay
   Our steps towards the tomb of our desire,
   Do Thou, O Lord, our musing eyes inspire
      To see the stone is rolled away,
   And find that self has thrown its grave-clothes hence
         And risen to live free.




XLVI
THE ASCENSION


   "LO, I am with you alway."  Thus He spake
   Girt with the zone of His disciples' love,
   And straightway, like the nascent flames that wake
   Upon a placid hearth, He soars above.
            Forlorn they cannot move;
   Their eyes are voyaging to track the Friend
   Who promised to be with them till the end.

   Once, the last once, His scar-gemmed Hand He lifts,
   The Hand that twined the children to His knee,
   Once downward bends the pitying Eye that sifts
   Our chaff and grain for all eternity:
            The blue immensity
   Robes its Creator in a cope of light,
   A cloud receives Him from their upturned sight.

   Thou "alway with us"?  Do the brakes of thorn
   No more entangle our tormented earth,
   Do women travail less when babes are born,
   Costs it less sweat for men to fight with dearth,
            Is life one Eden mirth,
   Moves there more laughter on the purple sea,
   Or richer gold across the rippling lea?

   I care not: but we know, O Friend of friends,
   Thou throned above art by our weary side,
   The light that upward sailed with Thee descends
   To be our morn undimmed by night or tide;
            And Thou, eternal Guide,
   Art not content to lead us to thy goal,
   But buildest heaven in the broken soul.




XLVII
A HYMN TO THE HOLY SPIRIT


   O SMILE upon the mirror of the world,
   O Bearer of the censer whence is curled
   The fragrant breath of watered trees at eve,
   And fires that slowly in the sunrise weave.

   Thou art the Why within the universe,
   Thou fillest hidden caves which seas immerse,
   Thou sowest flowers upon the snow-bound hills,
   And teachest music to the listening rills.

   Thou art the Guide of man's supreme ascent
   From sullen shapes that through the forest bent,
   To minds that sift the sovran right from wrong
   And forms more perfect than a polished song.

   The lily sceptre of sweet virgin love
   Is thine; the rosy coronet above
   The bridal brow is thine; from Thee the might
   Of infant eyes, like stars that calm the night.

   Thou art the Spirit of insurgent truth,
   Thou givest buried lore a second youth,
   Thou makest charity with wisdom grow,
   And provest falsehood but a losing throw.

   Thou calledst Moses from the wealthy Nile
   And all the idols of fair Philae's isle,
   To march for life beneath the desert sun
   And teach a rabble that their God was one.

   And Thou didst barb the tongue of Socrates
   To sting a city settled on the lees,
   To lash the vice of fluent sophistry
   And crucify the shifting inward lie.

   Thou plantedst pity in the Indian sage,
   Who conned the verses penned on sorrow's page,
   And strove to cut by mental abstinence
   The silken cord that threads the beads of sense

   But could not in himself his pity slake,
   And watching lotos blooms upon a lake,
   Which helpless sank or rose with every wave,
   Resolved all sinking souls to lift and save.

   And Thou within a cloud of maiden white
   Didst form that sun of radiating light,
   Christ's strong immaculate humanity,
   Transparent monstrance of His Deity.

   He, sinless, trod the brink of sin's abyss
   And for His love received a traitor's kiss;
   Then driven by thy soft compelling breath
   He, who was Life, resigned himself to death.

   He showed us that this fleshly house of sense
   Is not a nomad tent or barrier fence,
   But some fair chancel where thy vivid flame
   Might find an altar and reveal His name.

   Come, Holy Ghost, and breathe from sea to sea,
   Give each his special fruit of liberty;
   Tear from deceit the scintillating robe,
   From Satan's hands hurl down the rod and globe.

   Break Thou the spirit of the lords of lust,
   Whose passions scatter an infected dust;
   Reduce the men for whom the poor have bled,
   Who elevate their gold as God and Bread.

   Grant me a mind that may become thy lyre,
   A hate of hatred and a tongue of fire;
   And mid the clamour of all transient things
   Let me not miss the passage of thy wings.




XLVIII
"ADORA ET TACE"


   LOVE only is the school of love,
   And they who learn from Thee their art,
   Will find thy presence from above
      Touch altar, hand, and heart.

   While others ask how Thou canst come,
   Or tell me when Thou goest away,
   Be mine to call Thee to my home,
      And know that Thou wilt stay.

   While others all their worship weigh,
   And keenly blame the less or more,
   Be mine my lowly best to pay,
      "Be silent, and adore."

   Give me to keep thy new command,
   Who at thy precious blood was priced;
   Make all my world a holy land,
      Let all my life be Christ.




XLIX
THE REFUGE OF THE WANDERING


   COLD and cruel as the winds that carry
      Arctic hills of ice and snow,
   Past the cliffs where skirling sea-birds tarry
      And the seething breakers flow.

   Burning as the Afric wind that races
      Northward from its desert land,
   Wind that blasts and covers green oases
      With its ropes of parching sand.

   Rough and angry as the winds that bluster
      Where Tibetan temples shine,
   Winds like savage lancers come to muster
      On an Eastern frontier line.

   Sad and blind as winds that wander sobbing,
      Where the raw Atlantic mist
   From the stars their pearly radiance robbing,
      Grips the shore with damp white fist.

   So our souls from every quarter eddy,
      North and South and East and West,
   Jesu, till the wayward and the ready
      On thy heart all sink to rest.




L
THE LEGEND OF ST. CHRISTOPHER


   ON to the bank that recedes,
   On through the shadows that mock,
   Tearing my staff from the weeds,
   Bruising my feet on the rock,
   Caught by this Babe who appealed,
   Calling to echoes astray;
   Would that my heart I had steeled,
   Left Him to listen till day!
   Child, who dost crush me with weight,
   Child of the pitiful eyes,
   Whence didst Thou come to my gate?
   How didst Thou fool me to rise
         From my lone bed?

   Sweeter than bells at the Mass,
   Older and newer than time,
   Charming the shadows to pass
   Ringeth His voice in a chime.
   Firm is the touch of His hands,
   Soft as my mother's caress,
   Loosing my misery's bands,
   Calming the wrath I confess.
   Child, who hast healed all my pain,
   Joy of my soul, must we part
   Just when the bank we shall gain?
   Blest be these feet on my heart!
         They too have bled.




LI
THE LIGHT INVISIBLE


   O LIGHT that lives on every hill and shore,
   Beyond the light that dies at close of day,
   The tears fill up the chalice of mine eyes
   With gladness, when I see Thee far away.

   O Stream that flows until the world shall end,
   Past fretful town and hermitage and field,
   Red are thy waters, but they throb with peace;
   I touch their dew and all my wounds are healed.

   O Voice that speaks in every grove and street,
   Above the song of birds and oaths of men,
   I hear and follow Thee, although my steps
   Begin a course that lies beyond my ken.

   O Face returning at each Eucharist,
   More close than forms that change with changing years,
   I am the veil between myself and Thee,
   Burn Thou the veil, and burning, kill my fears.

   O Guest that comes to take away our best,
   And all the loves we garner at our side,
   Thou art our Best, our Home art Thou.  For Thee,
   Attentive I will labour and abide.




LII
ONWARD


   FAR, and how far it is not mine to tell,
      The hills of silken grey
   Enfold the vale, and yet above that fell
      The Shepherd knows a way.

   Far, and how far it is not mine to guess,
      A sea of hungry waves
   Surrounds me, but the Pilot thwarts their stress
      With skill that guides and saves.

   Far, and how far is all unknown to me,
      The many mansions lie
   Beyond the grave, yet will the Builder see
      And come to meet my cry.




LIII
THE FAITHFUL DEPARTED


                  SAY what good-bye
   We owe to those who lived unstained by guile,
                  Who seemed to die,
            But made their death a smile,
   As though to promise we should meet within
                  A little while.

                  Is this good-bye,
   To sorrow o'er the blood-red pall of day,
                  Till in the sky
            Faint tapers coldly pray;
   And think our joy died like the buried sun's
                  Last golden ray?

                  Is this good-bye,
   To tread on sallow leaves in autumn rain,
                  And hear winds sigh
            An echo of our pain;
   And think that never can the bud-crowned spring
                  Return again?

                  Is this good-bye,
   To watch the myriad falling flakes of snow
                  Whirl down and lie
            Upon the fields below;
   And think the wonted path is now too dim
                  For us to know?

                  Not so: good-bye
   Means faith in love kept warm by robes of white,
                  Faith to deny
            The death of any light,
   Faith that to-morrow will be yesterday
                  Without its night.




LIV
LETHE


   ERE we shall touch the jasper parapet,
         That God has set
   About His garden and the sea of glass,
         Shall we first pass
   Through some calm stream of soft forgetfulness
   And wash our hapless little joys away?
   And shall our souls in infant nakedness
   Emerge to bathe in God's eternal day?

   Shall we forget the garden roundelays
         Of piping Mays,
   When thrushes sang around the dewy lawns
         In roseleaf dawns,
   And tulips--purple, saffron, red and white,--
   Below the shade of box and fragrant bay,
   Would lift to heaven their well-poised heads, as bright
   As ever bloomed in Shiraz or Cathay?

   Shall we forget the music of the sea,
         The virgin glee
   Which swayed beneath her robes dyed emerald,
         And so enthralled
   The vernal sun that he would downward shower
   More silver on her violet crystal fringe
   Than ever Sultan made his daughter's dower
   Or locked in Istamboul with key and hinge?

   Shall we forget our hearts did ever ache
         And slowly break,
   Because a dream by lightning truth was rent,
         Or we had spent
   A love too deep for one whole life to speak
   To gain a joy which proved too light to stay,
   As quickly fading as the tulip's cheek,
   As fickle as the sea in witching May?




LV
AVE ATQUE VALE


   OUR life is but a rosary
      Of Hail and then Farewell;
   Some never read the mystery
      The onyx beads foretell.

   They think each bead falls on the ground
      And spells another loss:
   God gathers them to make a round
      And seals it with His cross.

                      WILLIAM BRENDON AND SON, LTD.
                            PRINTERS, PLYMOUTH



  AMY LOWELL




  LILACS


  Lilacs,
  False blue,
  White,
  Purple,
  Color of lilac,
  Your great puffs of flowers
  Are everywhere in this my New England.
  Among your heart-shaped leaves
  Orange orioles hop like music-box birds and sing
  Their little weak soft songs;
  In the crooks of your branches
  The bright eyes of song sparrows sitting on spotted eggs
  Peer restlessly through the light and shadow
  Of all Springs.
  Lilacs in dooryards
  Holding quiet conversations with an early moon;
  Lilacs watching a deserted house
  Settling sideways into the grass of an old road;
  Lilacs, wind-beaten, staggering under a lopsided shock of bloom
  Above a cellar dug into a hill.
  You are everywhere.
  You were everywhere.
  You tapped the window when the preacher preached his sermon,
  And ran along the road beside the boy going to school.
  You stood by pasture-bars to give the cows good milking,
  You persuaded the housewife that her dish-pan was of silver
  And her husband an image of pure gold.
  You flaunted the fragrance of your blossoms
  Through the wide doors of Custom Houses--
  You, and sandal-wood, and tea,
  Charging the noses of quill-driving clerks
  When a ship was in from China.
  You called to them: "Goose-quill men, goose-quill men,
  May is a month for flitting,"
  Until they writhed on their high stools
  And wrote poetry on their letter-sheets behind the propped-up
        ledgers.
  Paradoxical New England clerks,
  Writing inventories in ledgers, reading the "Song of Solomon" at
        night,
  So many verses before bedtime,
  Because it was the Bible.
  The dead fed you
  Amid the slant stones of graveyards.
  Pale ghosts who planted you
  Came in the night time
  And let their thin hair blow through your clustered stems.
  You are of the green sea,
  And of the stone hills which reach a long distance.
  You are of elm-shaded streets with little shops where they sell
        kites and marbles,
  You are of great parks where every one walks and nobody is at home.
  You cover the blind sides of greenhouses
  And lean over the top to say a hurry-word through the glass
  To your friends, the grapes, inside.

  Lilacs,
  False blue,
  White,
  Purple,
  Color of lilac,
  You have forgotten your Eastern origin,
  The veiled women with eyes like panthers,
  The swollen, aggressive turbans of jeweled Pashas.
  Now you are a very decent flower,
  A reticent flower,
  A curiously clear-cut, candid flower,
  Standing beside clean doorways,
  Friendly to a house-cat and a pair of spectacles,
  Making poetry out of a bit of moonlight
  And a hundred or two sharp blossoms.

  Maine knows you,
  Has for years and years;
  New Hampshire knows you,
  And Massachusetts
  And Vermont.
  Cape Cod starts you along the beaches to Rhode Island;
  Connecticut takes you from a river to the sea.
  You are brighter than apples,
  Sweeter than tulips,
  You are the great flood of our souls
  Bursting above the leaf-shapes of our hearts,
  You are the smell of all Summers,
  The love of wives and children,
  The recollection of the gardens of little children,
  You are State Houses and Charters
  And the familiar treading of the foot to and fro on a road it knows.
  May is lilac here in New England,
  May is a thrush singing "Sun up!" on a tip-top ash-tree,
  May is white clouds behind pine-trees
  Puffed out and marching upon a blue sky.
  May is a green as no other,
  May is much sun through small leaves,
  May is soft earth,
  And apple-blossoms,
  And windows open to a South wind.
  May is a full light wind of lilac
  From Canada to Narragansett Bay.

  Lilacs,
  False blue,
  White,
  Purple,
  Color of lilac,
  Heart-leaves of lilac all over New England,
  Roots of lilac under all the soil of New England,
  Lilac in me because I am New England,
  Because my roots are in it,
  Because my leaves are of it,
  Because my flowers are for it,
  Because it is my country
  And I speak to it of itself
  And sing of it with my own voice
  Since certainly it is mine.




  TWENTY-FOUR HOKKU ON A MODERN THEME


        I

  Again the larkspur,
  Heavenly blue in my garden.
  They, at least, unchanged.


        II

  How have I hurt you?
  You look at me with pale eyes,
  But these are my tears.


        III

  Morning and evening--
  Yet for us once long ago
  Was no division.


        IV

  I hear many words.
  Set an hour when I may come
  Or remain silent.


        V

  In the ghostly dawn
  I write new words for your ears--
  Even now you sleep.


        VI

  This then is morning.
  Have you no comfort for me
  Cold-colored flowers?


        VII

  My eyes are weary
  Following you everywhere.
  Short, oh short, the days!


        VIII

  When the flower falls
  The leaf is no more cherished.
  Every day I fear.


        IX

  Even when you smile
  Sorrow is behind your eyes.
  Pity me, therefore.


        X

  Laugh--it is nothing.
  To others you may seem gay,
  I watch with grieved eyes.


        XI

  Take it, this white rose.
  Stems of roses do not bleed;
  Your fingers are safe.


        XII

  As a river-wind
  Hurling clouds at a bright moon,
  So am I to you.


        XIII

  Watching the iris,
  The faint and fragile petals--
  How am I worthy?


        XIV

  Down a red river
  I drift in a broken skiff.
  Are you then so brave?


        XV

  Night lies beside me
  Chaste and cold as a sharp sword.
  It and I alone.


        XVI

  Last night it rained.
  Now, in the desolate dawn,
  Crying of blue jays.


        XVII

  Foolish so to grieve,
  Autumn has its colored leaves--
  But before they turn?


        XVIII

  Afterwards I think:
  Poppies bloom when it thunders.
  Is this not enough?


        XIX

  Love is a game--yes?
  I think it is a drowning:
  Black willows and stars.


        XX

  When the aster fades
  The creeper flaunts in crimson.
  Always another!


        XXI

  Turning from the page,
  Blind with a night of labor,
  I hear morning crows.


        XXII

  A cloud of lilies,
  Or else you walk before me.
  Who could see clearly?


        XXIII

  Sweet smell of wet flowers
  Over an evening garden.
  Your portrait, perhaps?


        XXIV

  Staying in my room,
  I thought of the new Spring leaves.
  That day was happy.




  THE SWANS


  The swans float and float
  Along the moat
  Around the Bishop's garden,
  And the white clouds push
  Across a blue sky
  With edges that seem to draw in and harden.

  Two slim men of white bronze
  Beat each with a hammer on the end of a rod
  The hours of God.
  Striking a bell,
  They do it well.
  And the echoes jump, and tinkle, and swell
  In the Cathedral's carved stone polygons.

  The swans float
  About the moat,
  And another swan sits still in the air
  Above the old inn.
  He gazes into the street
  And swims the cold and the heat,
  He has always been there,
  At least so say the cobbles in the square.
  They listen to the beat
  Of the hammered bell,
  And think of the feet
  Which beat upon their tops;
  But what they think they do not tell.

  And the swans who float
  Up and down the moat
  Gobble the bread the Bishop feeds them.
  The slim bronze men beat the hour again,
  But only the gargoyles up in the hard blue air heed them.

  When the Bishop says a prayer,
  And the choir sing "Amen,"
  The hammers break in on them there:
  Clang! Clang! Beware! Beware!
  The carved swan looks down at the passing men,
  And the cobbles wink: "An hour has gone again."
  But the people kneeling before the Bishop's chair
  Forget the passing over the cobbles in the square.

  An hour of day and an hour of night,
  And the clouds float away in a red-splashed light.
  The sun, quotha? or white, white
  Smoke with fire all alight.

  An old roof crashing on a Bishop's tomb,
  Swarms of men with a thirst for room,
  And the footsteps blur to a shower, shower, shower,
  Of men passing--passing--every hour,
  With arms of power, and legs of power,
  And power in their strong, hard minds.
  No need then
  For the slim bronze men
  Who beat God's hours: Prime, Tierce, None.
  Who wants to hear? No one.
  We will melt them, and mold them,
  And make them a stem
  For a banner gorged with blood,
  For a blue-mouthed torch.
  So the men rush like clouds,
  They strike their iron edges on the Bishop's chair
  And fling down the lanterns by the tower stair.
  They rip the Bishop out of his tomb
  And break the mitre off of his head.
  "See," say they, "the man is dead;
  He cannot shiver or sing.
  We'll toss for his ring."

  The cobbles see this all along the street
  Coming--coming--on countless feet.
  And the clockmen mark the hours as they go.
  But slow--slow--
  The swans float
  In the Bishop's moat.
  And the inn swan
  Sits on and on,
  Staring before him with cold glass eyes.
  Only the Bishop walks serene,
  Pleased with his church, pleased with his house,
  Pleased with the sound of the hammered bell,
  Beating his doom.
  Saying "Boom! Boom! Room! Room!"
  He is old, and kind, and deaf, and blind,
  And very, very pleased with his charming moat
  And the swans which float.




  PRIME


  Your voice is like bells over roofs at dawn
  When a bird flies
  And the sky changes to a fresher color.

  Speak, speak, Beloved.
  Say little things
  For my ears to catch
  And run with them to my heart.




  VESPERS


  Last night, at sunset,
  The foxgloves were like tall altar candles.
  Could I have lifted you to the roof of the greenhouse, my Dear,
  I should have understood their burning.




  IN EXCELSIS


  You--you--
  Your shadow is sunlight on a plate of silver;
  Your footsteps, the seeding-place of lilies;
  Your hands moving, a chime of bells across a windless air.

  The movement of your hands is the long, golden running of light from
        a rising sun;
  It is the hopping of birds upon a garden-path.

  As the perfume of jonquils, you come forth in the morning.
  Young horses are not more sudden than your thoughts,
  Your words are bees about a pear-tree,
  Your fancies are the gold-and-black striped wasps buzzing among red
        apples.
  I drink your lips,
  I eat the whiteness of your hands and feet.
  My mouth is open,
  As a new jar I am empty and open.
  Like white water are you who fill the cup of my mouth,
  Like a brook of water thronged with lilies.

  You are frozen as the clouds,
  You are far and sweet as the high clouds.
  I dare reach to you,
  I dare touch the rim of your brightness.
  I leap beyond the winds,
  I cry and shout,
  For my throat is keen as a sword
  Sharpened on a hone of ivory.
  My throat sings the joy of my eyes,
  The rushing gladness of my love.

  How has the rainbow fallen upon my heart?
  How have I snared the seas to lie in my fingers
  And caught the sky to be a cover for my head?
  How have you come to dwell with me,
  Compassing me with the four circles of your mystic lightness,
  So that I say "Glory! Glory!" and bow before you
  As to a shrine?

  Do I tease myself that morning is morning and a day after?
  Do I think the air a condescension,
  The earth a politeness,
  Heaven a boon deserving thanks?
  So you--air--earth--heaven--
  I do not thank you,
  I take you,
  I live.
  And those things which I say in consequence
  Are rubies mortised in a gate of stone.




  LA RONDE DU DIABLE


  "Here we go round the ivy-bush,"
  And that's a tune we all dance to.
  Little poet people snatching ivy,
  Trying to prevent one another from snatching ivy.
  If you get a leaf, there's another for me;
  Look at the bush.
  But I want your leaf, Brother, and you mine,
  Therefore, of course, we push.

  "Here we go round the laurel-tree."
  Do we want laurels for ourselves most,
  Or most that no one else shall have any?
  We cannot stop to discuss the question.
  We cannot stop to plait them into crowns
  Or notice whether they become us.
  We scarcely see the laurel-tree,
  The crowd about us is all we see,
  And there's no room in it for you and me.
  Therefore, Sisters, it's my belief
  We've none of us very much chance at a leaf.

  "Here we go round the barberry-bush."
  It's a bitter, blood-red fruit at best,
  Which puckers the mouth and burns the heart.
  To tell the truth, only one or two
  Want the berries enough to strive
  For more than he has, more than she.
  An acid berry for you and me.
  Abundance of berries for all who will eat,
  But an aching meat.
  That's poetry.
  And who wants to swallow a mouthful of sorrow?
  The world is old and our century
  Must be well along, and we've no time to waste.
  Make haste, Brothers and Sisters, push
  With might and main round the ivy-bush,
  Struggle and pull at the laurel-tree,
  And leave the barberries be
  For poor lost lunatics like me,
  Who set them so high
  They overtop the sun in the sky.
  Does it matter at all that we don't know why?



  ROBERT FROST




  FIRE AND ICE


  Some say the world will end in fire,
    Some say in ice.
  From what I've tasted of desire
  I hold with those who favor fire.
    But if it had to perish twice,
  I think I know enough of hate
    To know that for destruction ice
  Is also great,
    And would suffice.




  THE GRINDSTONE


  Having a wheel and four legs of its own
  Has never availed the cumbersome grindstone
  To get it anywhere that I can see.
  These hands have helped it go and even race;
  Not all the motion, though, they ever lent,
  Not all the miles it may have thought it went,
  Have got it one step from the starting place.
  It stands beside the same old apple tree.
  The shadow of the apple tree is thin
  Upon it now; its feet are fast in snow.
  All other farm machinery's gone in,
  And some of it on no more legs and wheel
  Than the grindstone can boast to stand or go.
  (I'm thinking chiefly of the wheelbarrow.)
  For months it hasn't known the taste of steel,
  Washed down with rusty water in a tin.
  But standing outdoors, hungry, in the cold,
  Except in towns, at night, is not a sin.
  And, anyway, its standing in the yard
  Under a ruinous live apple tree
  Has nothing any more to do with me,
  Except that I remember how of old,
  One summer day, all day I drove it hard,
  And some one mounted on it rode it hard,
  And he and I between us ground a blade.

  I gave it the preliminary spin,
  And poured on water (tears it might have been);
  And when it almost gayly jumped and flowed,
  A Father-Time-like man got on and rode,
  Armed with a scythe and spectacles that glowed.
  He turned on will-power to increase the load
  And slow me down--and I abruptly slowed,
  Like coming to a sudden railroad station.
  I changed from hand to hand in desperation.

  I wondered what machine of ages gone
  This represented an improvement on.
  For all I knew it may have sharpened spears
  And arrowheads itself. Much use for years
  Had gradually worn it an oblate
  Spheroid that kicked and struggled in its gait,
  Appearing to return me hate for hate.
  (But I forgive it now as easily
  As any other boyhood enemy
  Whose pride has failed to get him anywhere.)
  I wondered who it was the man thought ground--
  The one who held the wheel back or the one
  Who gave his life to keep it going round?
  I wondered if he really thought it fair
  For him to have the say when we were done.
  Such were the bitter thoughts to which I turned.

  Not for myself was I so much concerned.
  Oh, no!--although, of course, I could have found
  A better way to pass the afternoon
  Than grinding discord out of a grindstone,
  And beating insects at their gritty tune.
  Nor was I for the man so much concerned.
  Once when the grindstone almost jumped its bearing
  It looked as if he might be badly thrown
  And wounded on his blade. So far from caring,
  I laughed inside, and only cranked the faster,
  (It ran as if it wasn't greased but glued);
  I welcomed any moderate disaster
  That might be calculated to postpone
  What evidently nothing could conclude.

  The thing that made me more and more afraid
  Was that we'd ground it sharp and hadn't known,
  And now were only wasting precious blade.
  And when he raised it dripping once and tried
  The creepy edge of it with wary touch,
  And viewed it over his glasses funny-eyed,
  Only disinterestedly to decide
  It needed a turn more, I could have cried
  Wasn't there danger of a turn too much?
  Mightn't we make it worse instead of better?
  I was for leaving something to the whetter.
  What if it wasn't all it should be? I'd
  Be satisfied if he'd be satisfied.




  THE WITCH OF COOS

  _Circa 1922_


  I staid the night for shelter at a farm
  Behind the mountain, with a mother and son,
  Two old-believers. They did all the talking.

_The Mother_
  Folks think a witch who has familiar spirits
  She _could_ call up to pass a winter evening,
  But _won't_, should be burned at the stake or something.
  Summoning spirits isn't "Button, button,
  Who's got the button?" I'd have you understand.

_The Son_
  Mother can make a common table rear
  And kick with two legs like an army mule.

_The Mother_
  And when I've done it, what good have I done?
  Rather than tip a table for you, let me
  Tell you what Ralle the Sioux Control once told me.
  He said the dead had souls, but when I asked him
  How that could be--I thought the dead were souls,
  He broke my trance. Don't that make you suspicious
  That there's something the dead are keeping back?
  Yes, there's something the dead are keeping back.

_The Son_
  You wouldn't want to tell him what we have
  Up attic, mother?

_The Mother_
                    Bones--a skeleton.

_The Son_
  But the headboard of mother's bed is pushed
  Against the attic door: the door is nailed.
  It's harmless. Mother hears it in the night
  Halting perplexed behind the barrier
  Of door and headboard. Where it wants to get
  Is back into the cellar where it came from.

_The Mother_
  We'll never let them, will we, son? We'll never!

_The Son_
  It left the cellar forty years ago
  And carried itself like a pile of dishes
  Up one flight from the cellar to the kitchen,
  Another from the kitchen to the bedroom,
  Another from the bedroom to the attic,
  Right past both father and mother, and neither stopped it.
  Father had gone upstairs; mother was downstairs.
  I was a baby: I don't know where I was.

_The Mother_
  The only fault my husband found with me--
  I went to sleep before I went to bed,
  Especially in winter when the bed
  Might just as well be ice and the clothes snow.
  The night the bones came up the cellar-stairs
  Toffile had gone to bed alone and left me,
  But left an open door to cool the room off
  So as to sort of turn me out of it.
  I was just coming to myself enough
  To wonder where the cold was coming from,
  When I heard Toffile upstairs in the bedroom
  And thought I heard him downstairs in the cellar.
  The board we had laid down to walk dry-shod on
  When there was water in the cellar in spring
  Struck the hard cellar bottom. And then some one
  Began the stairs, two footsteps for each step,
  The way a man with one leg and a crutch,
  Or little child, comes up. It wasn't Toffile:
  It wasn't any one who could be there.
  The bulkhead double-doors were double-locked
  And swollen tight and buried under snow.
  The cellar windows were banked up with sawdust
  And swollen tight and buried under snow.
  It was the bones. I knew them--and good reason.
  My first impulse was to get to the knob
  And hold the door. But the bones didn't try
  The door; they halted helpless on the landing,
  Waiting for things to happen in their favor.
  The faintest restless rustling ran all through them.
  I never could have done the thing I did
  If the wish hadn't been too strong in me
  To see how they were mounted for this walk.
  I had a vision of them put together
  Not like a man, but like a chandelier.
  So suddenly I flung the door wide on him.
  A moment he stood balancing with emotion,
  And all but lost himself. (A tongue of fire
  Flashed out and licked along his upper teeth.
  Smoke rolled inside the sockets of his eyes.)
  Then he came at me with one hand outstretched,
  The way he did in life once; but this time
  I struck the hand off brittle on the floor,
  And fell back from him on the floor myself.
  The finger-pieces slid in all directions.
  (Where did I see one of those pieces lately?
  Hand me my button-box--it must be there.)
  I sat up on the floor and shouted, "Toffile,
  It's coming up to you." It had its choice
  Of the door to the cellar or the hall.
  It took the hall door for the novelty,
  And set off briskly for so slow a thing,
  Still going every which way in the joints, though,
  So that it looked like lightning or a scribble,
  From the slap I had just now given its hand.
  I listened till it almost climbed the stairs
  From the hall to the only finished bedroom,
  Before I got up to do anything;
  Then ran and shouted, "Shut the bedroom door,
  Toffile, for my sake!" "Company," he said,
  "Don't make me get up; I'm too warm in bed."
  So lying forward weakly on the handrail
  I pushed myself upstairs, and in the light
  (The kitchen had been dark) I had to own
  I could see nothing. "Toffile, I don't see it.
  It's with us in the room, though. It's the bones."
  "What bones?" "The cellar bones--out of the grave."

       *     *     *     *     *

  That made him throw his bare legs out of bed
  And sit up by me and take hold of me.
  I wanted to put out the light and see
  If I could see it, or else mow the room,
  With our arms at the level of our knees,
  And bring the chalk-pile down. "I'll tell you what--
  It's looking for another door to try.
  The uncommonly deep snow has made him think
  Of his old song, _The Wild Colonial Boy_,
  He always used to sing along the tote-road.
  He's after an open door to get out-doors.
  Let's trap him with an open door up attic."
  Toffile agreed to that, and sure enough,
  Almost the moment he was given an opening,
  The steps began to climb the attic stairs.
  I heard them. Toffile didn't seem to hear them.
  "Quick!" I slammed to the door and held the knob.
  "Toffile, get nails." I made him nail the door shut,
  And push the headboard of the bed against it.

  Then we asked was there anything
  Up attic that we'd ever want again.
  The attic was less to us than the cellar.
  If the bones liked the attic, let them like it,
  Let them _stay_ in the attic. When they sometimes
  Come down the stairs at night and stand perplexed
  Behind the door and headboard of the bed,
  Brushing their chalky skull with chalky fingers,
  With sounds like the dry rattling of a shutter,
  That's what I sit up in the dark to say--
  To no one any more since Toffile died.
  Let them stay in the attic since they went there.
  I promised Toffile to be cruel to them
  For helping them be cruel once to him.

_The Son_
  We think they had a grave down in the cellar.

_The Mother_
  We know they had a grave down in the cellar.

_The Son_
  We never could find out whose bones they were.

_The Mother_
  Yes, we could too, son. Tell the truth for once.
  They were a man's his father killed for me.
  I mean a man he killed instead of me.
  The least I could do was to help dig their grave.
  We were about it one night in the cellar.
  Son knows the story: but 'twas not for him
  To tell the truth, suppose the time had come.
  Son looks surprised to see me end a lie
  We'd kept up all these years between ourselves
  So as to have it ready for outsiders.
  But to-night I don't care enough to lie--
  I don't remember why I ever cared.
  Toffile, if he were here, I don't believe
  Could tell you why he ever cared himself....

  She hadn't found the finger-bone she wanted
  Among the buttons poured out in her lap.

  I verified the name next morning: Toffile;
  The rural letter-box said Toffile Lajway.




  A BROOK IN THE CITY


  The farm house lingers, though averse to square
  With the new city street it has to wear
  A number in. But what about the brook
  That held the house as in an elbow-crook?
  I ask as one who knew the brook, its strength
  And impulse, having dipped a finger-length
  And made it leap my knuckle, having tossed
  A flower to try its currents where they crossed.
  The meadow grass could be cemented down
  From growing under pavements of a town;
  The apple trees be sent to hearth-stone flame.
  Is water wood to serve a brook the same?
  How else dispose of an immortal force
  No longer needed? Staunch it at its source
  With cinder loads dumped down? The brook was thrown
  Deep in a sewer dungeon under stone
  In fetid darkness still to live and run--
  And all for nothing it had ever done
  Except forget to go in fear perhaps.
  No one would know except for ancient maps
  That such a brook ran water. But I wonder
  If, from its being kept forever under,
  These thoughts may not have risen that so keep
  This new-built city from both work and sleep.




  DESIGN


  I found a dimpled spider, fat and white,
  On a white heal-all, holding up a moth
  Like a white piece of rigid satin cloth--
  Assorted characters of death and blight
  Mixed ready to begin the morning right,
  Like the ingredients of a witches' broth--
  A snow-drop spider, a flower like froth,
  And dead wings carried like a paper kite.

  What had that flower to do with being white,
  The wayside blue and innocent heal-all?
  What brought the kindred spider to that height,
  Then steered the white moth thither in the night?
  What but design of darkness to appal?--
  If design govern in a thing so small.




  CARL SANDBURG




  AND SO TO-DAY


  And so to-day--they lay him away--
  the boy nobody knows the name of--
  the buck private--the unknown soldier--
  the doughboy who dug under and died
  when they told him to--that's him.

  Down Pennsylvania Avenue to-day the riders go,
  men and boys riding horses, roses in their teeth,
  stems of roses, rose leaf stalks, rose dark leaves--
  the line of the green ends in a red rose flash.

  Skeleton men and boys riding skeleton horses,
  the rib bones shine, the rib bones curve,
  shine with savage, elegant curves--
  a jawbone runs with a long white slant,
  a skull dome runs with a long white arch,
  bone triangles click and rattle,
  elbows, ankles, white line slants--
  shining in the sun, past the White House,
  past the Treasury Building, Army and Navy Buildings,
  on to the mystic white Capitol Dome--
  so they go down Pennsylvania Avenue to-day,
  skeleton men and boys riding skeleton horses,
  stems of roses in their teeth,
  rose dark leaves at their white jaw slants--
  and a horse laugh question nickers and whinnies,
  moans with a whistle out of horse head teeth:
  why? who? where?

    ("The big fish--eat the little fish--
      the little fish--eat the shrimps--
      and the shrimps--eat mud,"--
      said a cadaverous man--with a black umbrella--
      spotted with white polka dots--with a missing
      ear--with a missing foot and arms--
      with a missing sheath of muscles
      singing to the silver sashes of the sun.)

  And so to-day--they lay him away--
  the boy nobody knows the name of--
  the buck private--the unknown soldier--
  the doughboy who dug under and died
  when they told him to--that's him.

  If he picked himself and said, "I am ready to die,"
  if he gave his name and said, "My country, take me,"
  then the baskets of roses to-day are for the Boy,
  the flowers, the songs, the steamboat whistles,
  the proclamations of the honorable orators,
  they are all for the Boy--that's him.

  If the government of the Republic picked him saying,
  "You are wanted, your country takes you"--
  if the Republic put a stethoscope to his heart
  and looked at his teeth and tested his eyes and said,
  "You are a citizen of the Republic and a sound
  animal in all parts and functions--the Republic takes you"--
  then to-day the baskets of flowers are all for the Republic,
  the roses, the songs, the steamboat whistles,
  the proclamations of the honorable orators--
  they are all for the Republic.

  And so to-day--they lay him away--
  and an understanding goes--his long sleep shall be
  under arms and arches near the Capitol Dome--
  there is an authorization--he shall have tomb companions--
  the martyred presidents of the Republic--
  the buck private--the unknown soldier--that's him.

  The man who was war commander of the armies of the Republic
  rides down Pennsylvania Avenue--
  The man who is peace commander of the armies of the Republic
  rides down Pennsylvania Avenue--
  for the sake of the Boy, for the sake of the Republic.

     (And the hoofs of the skeleton horses
      all drum soft on the asphalt footing--
      so soft is the drumming, so soft the roll call
      of the grinning sergeants calling the roll call--
      so soft is it all--a camera man murmurs, "Moonshine.")

  Look--who salutes the coffin--
  lays a wreath of remembrance
  on the box where a buck private
  sleeps a clean dry sleep at last--
  look--it is the highest ranking general
  of the officers of the armies of the Republic.

     (Among pigeon corners of the Congressional Library--they
      file documents quietly, casually, all in a day's work--
      this human document, the buck private nobody knows the
      name of--they file away in granite and steel--with music
      and roses, salutes, proclamations of the honorable
      orators.)

  Across the country, between two ocean shore lines,
  where cities cling to rail and water routes,
  there people and horses stop in their foot tracks,
  cars and wagons stop in their wheel tracks--
  faces at street crossings shine with a silence
  of eggs laid in a row on a pantry shelf--
  among the ways and paths of the flow of the Republic
  faces come to a standstill, sixty clockticks count--
  in the name of the Boy, in the name of the Republic.

     (A million faces a thousand miles from Pennsylvania Avenue
      stay frozen with a look, a clocktick, a moment--
      skeleton riders on skeleton horses--the nickering high horse
            laugh,
      the whinny and the howl up Pennsylvania Avenue:
      who? why? where?)

      (So people far from the asphalt footing of Pennsylvania
      Avenue look, wonder, mumble--the riding white-jaw
      phantoms ride hi-eeee, hi-eeee, hi-yi, hi-yi, hi-eeee--
      the proclamations of the honorable orators mix with the
      top-sergeants whistling the roll call.)

  If when the clockticks counted sixty,
  when the heartbeats of the Republic
  came to a stop for a minute,
  if the Boy had happened to sit up,
  happening to sit up as Lazarus sat up, in the story,
  then the first shivering language to drip off his mouth
  might have come as, "Thank God," or "Am I dreaming?"
  or "What the hell" or "When do we eat?"
  or "Kill 'em, kill 'em, the...."
  or "Was that ... a rat ... ran over my face?"
  or "For Christ's sake, gimme water, gimme water,"
  or "Blub blub, bloo bloo...."
  or any bubbles of shell shock gibberish
  from the gashes of No Man's Land.

  Maybe some buddy knows,
  some sister, mother, sweetheart,
  maybe some girl who sat with him once
  when a two-horn silver moon
  slid on the peak of a house-roof gable,
  and promises lived in the air of the night,
  when the air was filled with promises,
  when any little slip-shoe lovey
  could pick a promise out of the air.

      "Feed it to 'em,
      they lap it up,
      bull ... bull ... bull,"
  Said a movie news reel camera man,
  Said a Washington newspaper correspondent,
  Said a baggage handler lugging a trunk,
  Said a two-a-day vaudeville juggler,
  Said a hanky-pank selling jumping-jacks.
  "Hokum--they lap it up," said the bunch.

  And a tall scar-face ball player,
  Played out as a ball player,
  Made a speech of his own for the hero boy,
  Sent an earful of his own to the dead buck private:
       "It's all safe now, buddy,
       Safe when you say yes,
       Safe for the yes-men."

  He was a tall scar-face battler
  With his face in a newspaper
  Reading want ads, reading jokes,
  Reading love, murder, politics,
  Jumping from jokes back to the want ads,
  Reading the want ads first and last,
  The letters of the word JOB, "J-O-B,"
  Burnt like a shot of bootleg booze
  In the bones of his head--
  In the wish of his scar-face eyes.

  The honorable orators,
  Always the honorable orators,
  Buttoning the buttons on their prinz alberts,
  Pronouncing the syllables "sac-ri-fice,"
  Juggling those bitter salt-soaked syllables--
  Do they ever gag with hot ashes in their mouths?
  Do their tongues ever shrivel with a pain of fire
  Across those simple syllables "sac-ri-fice"?

  (There was one orator people far off saw.
  He had on a gunnysack shirt over his bones,
  And he lifted an elbow socket over his head,
  And he lifted a skinny signal finger.
  And he had nothing to say, nothing easy--
  He mentioned ten million men, mentioned them as having gone west,
        mentioned them as shoving up the daisies.
  We could write it all on a postage stamp, what he said.
  He said it and quit and faded away,
  A gunnysack shirt on his bones.)

      Stars of the night sky,
      did you see that phantom fadeout,
      did you see those phantom riders,
      skeleton riders on skeleton horses,
      stems of roses in their teeth,
      rose leaves red on white-jaw slants,
      grinning along on Pennsylvania Avenue,
      the top-sergeants calling roll calls--
      did their horses nicker a horse laugh?
      did the ghosts of the boney battalions
      move out and on, up the Potomac, over on the Ohio
      and out to the Mississippi, the Missouri, the Red River,
      and down to the Rio Grande, and on to the Yazoo,
      over to the Chattahoochee and up to the Rappahannock?
      did you see 'em, stars of the night sky?

      And so to-day--they lay him away--
      the boy nobody knows the name of--
      they lay him away in granite and steel--
      with music and roses--under a flag--
      under a sky of promises.




  CALIFORNIA CITY LANDSCAPE


  On a mountain-side the real estate agents
  Put up signs marking the city lots to be sold there.
  A man whose father and mother were Irish
  Ran a goat farm half-way down the mountain;
  He drove a covered wagon years ago,
  Understood how to handle a rifle,
  Shot grouse, buffalo, Indians, in a single year,
  And now was raising goats around a shanty.
  Down at the foot of the mountain
  Two Japanese families had flower farms.
  A man and woman were in rows of sweet peas
  Picking the pink and white flowers
  To put in baskets and take to the Los Angeles market.
  They were clean as what they handled
  There in the morning sun, the big people and the baby-faces.
  Across the road, high on another mountain,
  Stood a house saying, "I am it," a commanding house.
  There was the home of a motion picture director
  Famous for lavish whore-house interiors,
  Clothes ransacked from the latest designs for women
  In the combats of "male against female."
  The mountain, the scenery, the layout of the landscape,
  And the peace of the morning sun as it happened,
  The miles of houses pocketed in the valley beyond--
  It was all worth looking at, worth wondering about,
  How long it might last, how young it might be.




  UPSTREAM


  The strong men keep coming on.
  They go down shot, hanged, sick, broken.
  They live on, fighting, singing, lucky as plungers.

  The strong men ... they keep coming on.
  The strong mothers pulling them from a dark sea, a great prairie, a
        long mountain.

  Call hallelujah, call amen, call deep thanks.
  The strong men keep coming on.




  WINDFLOWER LEAF


  This flower is repeated
  out of old winds, out of
  old times.

  The wind repeats these, it
  must have these, over and
  over again.

  Oh, windflowers so fresh,
  Oh, beautiful leaves, here
  now again.

    The domes over
    fall to pieces.
    The stones under
    fall to pieces.
    Rain and ice
    wreck the works.
  The wind keeps, the windflowers
    keep, the leaves last,
  The wind young and strong lets
    these last longer than stones.




  VACHEL LINDSAY




  IN PRAISE OF JOHNNY APPLESEED[1]

  (_Born 1775. Died 1847_)

[Footnote 1: The best account of John Chapman's career, under the name
"Johnny Appleseed," is to be found in _Harper's Monthly Magazine_,
November, 1871.]


  I. ~Over the Appalachian Barricade~

  [Sidenote: _To be read like old leaves on the elm tree of Time.
             Sifting soft winds with sentence and rhyme_.]

  In the days of President Washington,
  The glory of the nations,
  Dust and ashes,
  Snow and sleet,
  And hay and oats and wheat,
  Blew west,
  Crossed the Appalachians,
  Found the glades of rotting leaves, the soft deer-pastures,
  The farms of the far-off future
  In the forest.
  Colts jumped the fence,
  Snorting, ramping, snapping, sniffing,
  With gastronomic calculations,
  Crossed the Appalachians,
  The east walls of our citadel,
  And turned to gold-horned unicorns,
  Feasting in the dim, volunteer farms of the forest.
  Stripedest, kickingest kittens escaped,
  Caterwauling "Yankee Doodle Dandy,"
  Renounced their poor relations,
  Crossed the Appalachians,
  And turned to tiny tigers
  In the humorous forest.
  Chickens escaped
  From farmyard congregations,
  Crossed the Appalachians,
  And turned to amber trumpets
  On the ramparts of our Hoosiers' nest and citadel,
  Millennial heralds
  Of the foggy mazy forest.
  Pigs broke loose, scrambled west,
  Scorned their loathsome stations,
  Crossed the Appalachians,
  Turned to roaming, foaming wild boars
  Of the forest.
  The smallest, blindest puppies toddled west
  While their eyes were coming open,
  And, with misty observations,
  Crossed the Appalachians,
  Barked, barked, barked
  At the glow-worms and the marsh lights and the lightning-bugs,
  And turned to ravening wolves
  Of the forest.
  Crazy parrots and canaries flew west,
  Drunk on May-time revelations,
  Crossed the Appalachians,
  And turned to delirious, flower-dressed fairies
  Of the lazy forest.
  Haughtiest swans and peacocks swept west,
  And, despite soft derivations,
  Crossed the Appalachians,
  And turned to blazing warrior souls
  Of the forest,
  Singing the ways
  Of the Ancient of Days.
  And the "Old Continentals
  In their ragged regimentals,"
  With bard's imaginations,
  Crossed the Appalachians.
  And
  A boy
  Blew west
  And with prayers and incantations,
  And with "Yankee Doodle Dandy,"
  Crossed the Appalachians,
  And was "young John Chapman,"
  Then
  "Johnny Appleseed, Johnny Appleseed,"
  Chief of the fastnesses, dappled and vast,
  In a pack on his back,
  In a deer-hide sack,
  The beautiful orchards of the past,
  The ghosts of all the forests and the groves--
  In that pack on his back,
  In that talisman sack,
  To-morrow's peaches, pears and cherries,
  To-morrow's grapes and red raspberries,
  Seeds and tree souls, precious things,
  Feathered with microscopic wings,
  All the outdoors the child heart knows,
  And the apple, green, red, and white,
  Sun of his day and his night--
  The apple allied to the thorn,
  Child of the rose.
  Porches untrod of forest houses
  All before him, all day long,
  "Yankee Doodle" his marching song;
  And the evening breeze
  Joined his psalms of praise
  As he sang the ways
  Of the Ancient of Days.

  Leaving behind august Virginia,
  Proud Massachusetts, and proud Maine,
  Planting the trees that would march and train
  On, in his name to the great Pacific,
  Like Birnam wood to Dunsinane,
  Johnny Appleseed swept on,
  Every shackle gone,
  Loving every sloshy brake,
  Loving every skunk and snake,
  Loving every leathery weed,
  Johnny Appleseed, Johnny Appleseed,
  Master and ruler of the unicorn-ramping forest,
  The tiger-mewing forest,
  The rooster-trumpeting, boar-foaming, wolf-ravening forest,
  The spirit-haunted, fairy-enchanted forest,
  Stupendous and endless,
  Searching its perilous ways
  In the name of the Ancient of Days.


  III. ~The Indians Worship Him, but He hurries on~

  Painted kings in the midst of the clearing
  Heard him asking his friends the eagles
  To guard each planted seed and seedling.
  Then he was a god, to the red man's dreaming;
  Then the chiefs brought treasures grotesque and fair,--
  Magical trinkets and pipes and guns,
  Beads and furs from their medicine-lair,--
  Stuck holy feathers in his hair,
  Hailed him with austere delight.
  The orchard god was their guest through the night.

  While the late snow blew from bleak Lake Erie,
  Scourging rock and river and reed,
  All night long they made great medicine
  For Jonathan Chapman,
  Johnny Appleseed,
  Johnny Appleseed;
  And as though his heart were a wind-blown wheat-sheaf,
  As though his heart were a new-built nest,
  As though their heaven house were his breast,
  In swept the snow-birds singing glory.
  And I hear his bird heart beat its story,
  Hear yet how the ghost of the forest shivers,
  Hear yet the cry of the gray, old orchards,
  Dim and decaying by the rivers,
  And the timid wings of the bird-ghosts beating,
  And the ghosts of the tom-toms beating, beating.

  [Sidenote: _While you read, hear the hoof-beats of deer in the snow.
             And see, by their track, bleeding footprints we know._]

  But he left their wigwams and their love.
  By the hour of dawn he was proud and stark,
  Kissed the Indian babes with a sigh,
  Went forth to live on roots and bark,
  Sleep in the trees, while the years howled by--

  Calling the catamounts by name,
  And buffalo bulls no hand could tame,
  Slaying never a living creature,
  Joining the birds in every game,
  With the gorgeous turkey gobblers mocking,
  With the lean-necked eagles boxing and shouting;
  Sticking their feathers in his hair,--
  Turkey feathers,
  Eagle feathers,--
  Trading hearts with all beasts and weathers
  He swept on, winged and wonder-crested,
  Bare-armed, barefooted, and bare-breasted.

  [Sidenote: _While you read, see conventions of deer go by.
             The bucks toss their horns, the fuzzy fawns fly._]

  The maples, shedding their spinning seeds,
  Called to his appleseeds in the ground,
  Vast chestnut-trees, with their butterfly nations,
  Called to his seeds without a sound.
  And the chipmunk turned a "summer-set,"
  And the foxes danced the Virginia reel;
  Hawthorne and crab-thorn bent, rain-wet,
  And dropped their flowers in his night-black hair;
  And the soft fawns stopped for his perorations;
  And his black eyes shone through the forest-gleam,
  And he plunged young hands into new-turned earth,
  And prayed dear orchard boughs into birth;
  And he ran with the rabbit and slept with the stream.
  And he ran with the rabbit and slept with the stream.
  And so for us he made great medicine,
  And so for us he made great medicine,
  In the days of President Washington.


  III. ~Johnny Appleseed's Old Age~


  [Sidenote: _To be read
  like faint
  hoof-beats
  of fawns
  long gone
  From respectable
  pasture, and
  park and
  lawn,
  And heartbeats
  of
  fawns that
  are coming
  again
  When the
  forest, once
  more, is the
  master of
  men._]

  Long, long after,
  When settlers put up beam and rafter,
  They asked of the birds: "Who gave this fruit?
  Who watched this fence till the seeds took root?
  Who gave these boughs?" They asked the sky,
  And there was no reply.
  But the robin might have said,
  "To the farthest West he has followed the sun,
  His life and his empire just begun."

  Self-scourged, like a monk, with a throne for wages,
  Stripped like the iron-souled Hindu sages,
  Draped like a statue, in strings like a scarecrow,
  His helmet-hat an old tin pan,
  But worn in the love of the heart of man,
  More sane than the helm of Tamerlane,
  Hairy Ainu, wild man of Borneo, Robinson Crusoe--Johnny Appleseed;
  And the robin might have said,
  "Sowing, he goes to the far, new West,
  With the apple, the sun of his burning breast--
  The apple allied to the thorn,
  Child of the rose."

  Washington buried in Virginia,
  Jackson buried in Tennessee,
  Young Lincoln, brooding in Illinois,
  And Johnny Appleseed, priestly and free,
  Knotted and gnarled, past seventy years,
  Still planted on in the woods alone.
  Ohio and young Indiana--
  These were his wide altar-stone,
  Where still he burnt out flesh and bone.
  Twenty days ahead of the Indian, twenty years ahead of the white
        man,
  At last the Indian overtook him, at last the Indian hurried past
        him;
  At last the white man overtook him, at last the white man hurried
        past him;
  At last his own trees overtook him, at last his own trees hurried
        past him.
  Many cats were tame again,
  Many ponies tame again,
  Many pigs were tame again,
  Many canaries tame again;
  And the real frontier was his sun-burnt breast.

  From the fiery core of that apple, the earth,
  Sprang apple-amaranths divine.
  Love's orchards climbed to the heavens of the West,
  And snowed the earthly sod with flowers.
  Farm hands from the terraces of the blest
  Danced on the mists with their ladies fine;
  And Johnny Appleseed laughed with his dreams,
  And swam once more the ice-cold streams.
  And the doves of the spirit swept through the hours,
  With doom-calls, love-calls, death-calls, dream-calls;
  And Johnny Appleseed, all that year,
  Lifted his hands to the farm-filled sky,
  To the apple-harvesters busy on high;
  And so once more his youth began,
  And so for us he made great medicine--
  Johnny Appleseed, medicine-man.
  Then
  The sun was his turned-up broken barrel,
  Out of which his juicy apples rolled,
  Down the repeated terraces,
  Thumping across the gold,
  An angel in each apple that touched the forest mold,
  A ballot-box in each apple,
  A state capital in each apple,
  Great high schools, great colleges,
  All America in each apple,
  Each red, rich, round, and bouncing moon
  That touched the forest mold.
  Like scrolls and rolled-up flags of silk,
  He saw the fruits unfold,
  And all our expectations in one wild-flower-written dream,
  Confusion and death sweetness, and a thicket of crab-thorns,
  Heart of a hundred midnights, heart of the merciful morns.
  Heaven's boughs bent down with their alchemy,
  Perfumed airs, and thoughts of wonder.
  And the dew on the grass and his own cold tears
  Were one in brooding mystery,
  Though death's loud thunder came upon him,
  Though death's loud thunder struck him down--
  The boughs and the proud thoughts swept through the thunder,
  Till he saw our wide nation, each State a flower,
  Each petal a park for holy feet,
  With wild fawns merry on every street,
  With wild fawns merry on every street,
  The vista of ten thousand years, flower-lighted and complete.

  Hear the lazy weeds murmuring, bays and rivers whispering,
  From Michigan to Texas, California to Maine;
  Listen to the eagles, screaming, calling,
  "Johnny Appleseed, Johnny Appleseed,"
  There by the doors of old Fort Wayne.

  In the four-poster bed Johnny Appleseed built,
  Autumn rains were the curtains, autumn leaves were the quilt.
  He laid him down sweetly, and slept through the night,
  Like a bump on a log, like a stone washed white,
  There by the doors of old Fort Wayne.




  I KNOW ALL THIS WHEN GIPSY FIDDLES CRY


  Oh, gipsies, proud and stiff-necked and perverse,
  Saying: "We tell the fortunes of the nations,
  And revel in the deep palm of the world.
  The head-line is the road we choose for trade.
  The love-line is the lane wherein we camp.
  The life-line is the road we wander on.
  Mount Venus, Jupiter, and all the rest
  Are finger-tips of ranges clasping round
  And holding up the Romany's wide sky."

  Oh, gipsies, proud and stiff-necked and perverse,
  Saying: "We will swap horses till the doom,
  And mend the pots and kettles of mankind,
  And lend our sons to big-time vaudeville,
  Or to the race-track, or the learned world.
  But India's Brahma waits within their breasts.
  They will return to us with gipsy grins,
  And chatter Romany, and shake their curls
  And hug the dirtiest babies in the camp.
  They will return to the moving pillar of smoke,
  The whitest toothed, the merriest laughers known,
  The blackest haired of all the tribes of men.
  What trap can hold such cats? The Romany
  Has crossed such delicate palms with lead or gold,
  Wheedling in sun and rain, through perilous years,
  All coins now look alike. The palm is all.
  Our greasy pack of cards is still the book
  Most read of men. The heart's librarians,
  We tell all lovers what they want to know.
  So, out of the famed Chicago Library,
  Out of the great Chicago orchestras,
  Out of the skyscraper, the Fine Arts Building,
  Our sons will come with fiddles and with loot,
  Dressed, as of old, like turkey-cocks and zebras,
  Like tiger-lilies and chameleons,
  Go west with us to California,
  Telling the fortunes of the bleeding world,
  And kiss the sunset, ere their day is done."

  Oh, gipsies, proud and stiff-necked and perverse,
  Picking the brains and pockets of mankind,
  You will go westward for one-half hour yet.
  You will turn eastward in a little while.
  You will go back, as men turn to Kentucky,
  Land of their fathers, dark and bloody ground.
  When all the Jews go home to Syria,
  When Chinese cooks go back to Canton, China,
  When Japanese photographers return
  With their black cameras to Tokio,
  And Irish patriots to Donegal,
  And Scotch accountants back to Edinburgh,
  You will go back to India, whence you came.
  When you have reached the borders of your quest,
  Homesick at last, by many a devious way,
  Winding the wonderlands circuitous,
  By foot and horse will trace the long way back!
  Fiddling for ocean liners, while the dance
  Sweeps through the decks, your brown tribes all will go!
  Those east-bound ships will hear your long farewell
  On fiddle, piccolo, and flute and timbrel.
  I know all this, when gipsy fiddles cry.

  That hour of their homesickness, I myself
  Will turn, will say farewell to Illinois,
  To old Kentucky and Virginia,
  And go with them to India, whence they came.
  For they have heard a singing from the Ganges,
  And cries of orioles,--from the temple caves,--
  And Bengal's oldest, humblest villages.
  They smell the supper smokes of Amritsar.
  Green monkeys cry in Sanskrit to their souls
  From lofty bamboo trees of hot Madras.
  They think of towns to ease their feverish eyes,
  And make them stand and meditate forever,
  Domes of astonishment, to heal the mind.
  I know all this, when gipsy fiddles cry.

  What music will be blended with the wind
  When gipsy fiddlers, nearing that old land,
  Bring tunes from all the world to Brahma's house?
  Passing the Indus, winding poisonous forests,
  Blowing soft flutes at scandalous temple girls,
  Filling the highways with their magpie loot,
  What brass from my Chicago will they heap,
  What gems from Walla Walla, Omaha,
  Will they pile near the Bodhi Tree, and laugh?
  They will dance near such temples as best suit them,
  Though they will not quite enter, or adore,
  Looking on roofs, as poets look on lilies,
  Looking at towers, as boys at forest vines,
  That leap to tree-tops through the dizzy air.
  I know all this, when gipsy fiddles cry.

  And with the gipsies there will be a king
  And a thousand desperadoes just his style,
  With all their rags dyed in the blood of roses,
  Splashed with the blood of angels, and of demons.
  And he will boss them with an awful voice.
  And with a red whip he will beat his wife.
  He will be wicked on that sacred shore,
  And rattle cruel spurs against the rocks,
  And shake Calcutta's walls with circus bugles.
  He will kill Brahmins there, in Kali's name,
  And please the thugs, and blood-drunk of the earth.
  I know all this, when gipsy fiddles cry.

  Oh, sweating thieves, and hard-boiled scalawags,
  That still will boast your pride until the doom,
  Smashing every caste rule of the world,
  Reaching at last your Hindu goal to smash
  The caste rules of old India, and shout:
  "Down with the Brahmins, let the Romany reign."

  When gipsy girls look deep within my hand
  They always speak so tenderly and say
  That I am one of those star-crossed to wed
  A princess in a forest fairy-tale.
  So there will be a tender gipsy princess,
  My Juliet, shining through this clan.
  And I would sing you of her beauty now.
  And I will fight with knives the gipsy man
  Who tries to steal her wild young heart away.
  And I will kiss her in the waterfalls,
  And at the rainbow's end, and in the incense
  That curls about the feet of sleeping gods,
  And sing with her in canebrakes and in rice fields,
  In Romany, eternal Romany.
  We will sow secret herbs, and plant old roses,
  And fumble through dark, snaky palaces,
  Stable our ponies in the Taj Mahal,
  And sleep out-doors ourselves.
  In her strange fairy mill-wheel eyes will wait
  All windings and unwindings of the highways,
  From India, across America,--
  All windings and unwindings of my fancy,
  All windings and unwindings of all souls,
  All windings and unwindings of the heavens.
  I know all this, when gipsy fiddles cry.

  We gipsies, proud and stiff-necked and perverse,
  Standing upon the white Himalayas,
  Will think of far divine Yosemite.
  We will heal Hindu hermits there with oil
  Brought from California's tall sequoias.
  And we will be like gods that heap the thunders,
  And start young redwood trees on Time's own mountains.
  We will swap horses with the rising moon,
  And mend that funny skillet called Orion,
  Color the stars like San Francisco's street-lights,
  And paint our sign and signature on high
  In planets like a bed of crimson pansies;
  While a million fiddles shake all listening hearts,
  Crying good fortune to the Universe,
  Whispering adventure to the Ganges waves,
  And to the spirits, and all winds and gods.
  Till mighty Brahma puts his golden palm
  Within the gipsy king's great striped tent,
  And asks his fortune told by that great love-line
  That winds across his palm in splendid flame.

  Only the hearthstone of old India
  Will end the endless march of gipsy feet.
  I will go back to India with them
  When they go back to India whence they came.
  I know all this, when gipsy fiddles cry.




  JAMES OPPENHEIM




  HEBREWS


  I come of a mighty race.... I come of a very mighty race....
  Adam was a mighty man, and Noah a captain of the moving waters,
  Moses was a stern and splendid king, yea, so was Moses....
  Give me more songs like David's to shake my throat to the pit of the
        belly,
  And let me roll in the Isaiah thunder....

  Ho! the mightiest of our young men was born under a star in the
        midwinter....
  His name is written on the sun and it is frosted on the moon....
  Earth breathes him like an eternal spring: he is a second sky over
        the Earth.

  Mighty race! mighty race!--my flesh, my flesh
  Is a cup of song,
  Is a well in Asia....
  I go about with a dark heart where the Ages sit in a divine
        thunder....
  My blood is cymbal-clashed and the anklets of the dancers tinkle
        there....
  Harp and psaltery, harp and psaltery make drunk my spirit....
  I am of the terrible people, I am of the strange Hebrews....
  Amongst the swarms fixed like the rooted stars, my folk is a
        streaming Comet,
  Comet of the Asian tiger-darkness,
  The Wanderer of Eternity, the eternal Wandering Jew....

  Ho! we have turned against the mightiest of our young men
  And in that denial we have taken on the Christ,
  And the two thieves beside the Christ,
  And the Magdalen at the feet of the Christ,
  And the Judas with thirty silver pieces selling the Christ,--
  And our twenty centuries in Europe have the shape of a Cross
  On which we have hung in disaster and glory....

  Mighty race! mighty race!--my flesh, my flesh
  Is a cup of song,
  Is a well in Asia.




  ALFRED KREYMBORG




  ADAGIO: A DUET

  (_For J. S. and L. U._)


  Should you
  lay ear to these lines--
  you will not catch
  a distant drum of hoofs,
  cavalcade of Arabians,
  passionate horde bearing down,
  destroying your citadel--
  but maybe you'll hear--
  should you just
  listen at the right place,
  hold it tenaciously,
  give your full blood to the effort--
  maybe you'll note the start
  of a single step,
  always persistently faint,
  wavering in its movement
  between coming and going,
  never quite arriving,
  never quite passing--
  and tell me which it is,
  you or I
  that you greet,
  searching a mutual being--
  and whether two aren't closer
  for the labor of an ear?




  DIE KUCHE


  She lets the hydrant water run:
  He fancies lonely, banal,
  bald-headed mountains,
  affected by the daily
  caress of the tropical sun,
  weeping tears the length of brooks
  down their faces and flanks.
  She lets the hydrant water run:
  He hearkens Father Sebastian
  cooking and spreading homely themes
  over an inept-looking clavier
  confounding the wits of his children
  and all men's children
  down to the last generation.
  He marvels at the paradox,
  drums his head with the tattoo:
  how can a thing as small as he
  shape and maintain an art
  out of himself universal enough
  to carry her daily vigil
  to crystalled immortality?
  She lets the hydrant water run.




  RAIN


  It's all very well for you
    suddenly to withdraw
    and say, I'll come again,
  but what of the bruises you've left,
  what of the green and the blue,
    the yellow, purple and violet?--
  don't you be telling us,
    I'm innocent of these,
    irresponsible of happenings--
  didn't we see you steal next to her,
    tenderly,
    with your silver mist about you
    to hide your blandishment?--
  now, what of what followed, eh?--
  we saw you hover close,
    caress her,
    open her pore-cups,
    make a cross of her,
    quickly penetrate her--
  she opening to you,
    engulfing you,
    every limb of her,
    bud of her, pore of her?--
  don't call these things, kisses--
    mouth-kisses, hand-kisses,
    elbow, knee and toe,
  and let it go at that--
    disappear and promise
    what you'll never perform:
  we've known you to slink away
    until drought-time,
    drooping-time,
    withering-time:
  we've caught you crawling off
    into winter-time,
    try to cover what you've done
    with a long white scarf--
  your own frozen tears
    (likely phrase!)
    and lilt your,
    I'll be back in spring!
  Next spring, and you know it,
    she won't be the same,
    though she may look the same
    to you from where you are,
    and invite you down again!




  PEASANT


  It's the mixture of peasantry
    makes him so slow.
  He waggles his head
    before he speaks,
  like a cow
    before she crops.
  He bends to the habit
    of dragging his feet
    up under him,
  like a measuring-worm:
    some of his forefathers,
    stooped over books,
    ruled short straight lines
    under two rows of figures
    to keep their thin savings
    from sifting to the floor.
  Should you strike him
    with a question,
  he will blink twice or thrice
    and roll his head about,
  like an owl
    in the pin-pricks
    of a dawn he cannot see.
  There is mighty little flesh
    about his bones,
  there is no gusto
    in his stride:
  he seems to wait
    for the blow on the buttocks
    that will drive him
    another step forward--
    step forward to what?
  There is no land,
    no house,
    no barn,
  he has ever owned;
  he sits uncomfortable
    on chairs
    you might invite him to:
  if you did,
    he'd keep his hat in hand
    against the moment
    when some silent pause
    for which he hearkens
    with his ear to one side
    bids him move on--
    move on where?
  It doesn't matter.
  He has learned
    to shrug his shoulders,
    so he'll shrug his shoulders now:
  caterpillars do it
    when they're halted by a stick.
  Is there a sky overhead?--
    a hope worth flying to?--
  birds may know about it,
    but it's birds
    that birds descend from.




  BUBBLES


  You had best be very cautious how
  you say, I love you.
  If you accent the I,
  she has an opening for,
  who are you
  to strut on ahead
  and hint there aren't others,
  aren't, weren't and won't be?
  Blurt out the love,
  she has suspicion for, so?--
  why not hitherto?--
  what brings you bragging now?--
  and what'll it be hereafter?
  Defer to the you,
  she has certitude for, me?
  thanks, lad!--
  but why argue about it?--
  or fancy I'm lonesome?--
  do I look as though you had to?
  And having determined how
  you'll say it,
  you had next best ascertain whom
  it is that you say it to.
  That you're sure she's the one,
  that there'll never be another,
  never was one before.
  And having determined whom
  and having learned how,
  when you bring these together,
  inform the far of the intimate--
  like a bubble on a pond,
  emerging from below,
  round wonderment completed
  by the first sight of the sky--
  what good will it do,
  if she shouldn't, I love you?--
  a bubble's but a bubble once,
  a bubble grows to die.




  DIRGE


  Death alone
  has sympathy for weariness:
  understanding
  of the ways
  of mathematics:
  of the struggle
  against giving up what was given:
  the plus one minus one
  of nitrogen for oxygen:
  and the unequal odds,
  you a cell
  against the universe,
  a breath or two
  against all time:
  Death alone
  takes what is left
  without protest, criticism
  or a demand for more
  than one can give
  who can give
  no more than was given:
  doesn't even ask,
  but accepts it as it is,
  without examination,
  valuation,
  or comparison.




  COLOPHON

  (_For W. W._)


  The Occident and the Orient,
  posterior and posterior,
  sitting tight, holding fast
  the culture dumped by them
  on to primitive America,
  Atlantic to Pacific,
  were monumental colophons
  a disorderly country fellow,
  vulgar Long Islander.
  not overfond of the stench
  choking native respiration,
  poked down off the shelf
  with the aid of some
  mere blades of grass;
  and deliberately climbing up,
  brazenly usurping one end
  of the new America,
  now waves his spears aloft
  and shouts down valleys,
  across plains,
  over mountains,
  into heights:
  Come, what man of you
  dares climb the other?




  SARA TEASDALE




  WISDOM


  It was a night of early spring,
    The winter-sleep was scarcely broken;
  Around us shadows and the wind
    Listened for what was never spoken.

  Though half a score of years are gone,
    Spring comes as sharply now as then--
  But if we had it all to do
    It would be done the same again.

  It was a spring that never came;
    But we have lived enough to know
  That what we never have, remains;
    It is the things we have that go.




  PLACES


      I

  ~Twilight~

  (_Tucson_)

  Aloof as aged kings,
  Wearing like them the purple,
  The mountains ring the mesa
  Crowned with a dusky light;
  Many a time I watched
  That coming-on of darkness
  Till stars burned through the heavens
  Intolerably bright.

  It was not long I lived there,
  But I became a woman
  Under those vehement stars,
  For it was there I heard
  For the first time my spirit
  Forging an iron rule for me,
  As though with slow cold hammers
  Beating out word by word:

  "Take love when love is given,
  But never think to find it
  A sure escape from sorrow
  Or a complete repose;
  Only yourself can heal you,
  Only yourself can lead you
  Up the hard road to heaven
  That ends where no one knows."


     II

  Full Moon

  (_Santa Barbara_)

  I listened, there was not a sound to hear
    In the great rain of moonlight pouring down,
  The eucalyptus trees were carved in silver,
    And a light mist of silver lulled the town.

  I saw far off the gray Pacific bearing
    A broad white disk of flame,
  And on the garden-walk a snail beside me
    Tracing in crystal the slow way he came.


     III

  Winter Sun

  (_Lenox_)

  There was a bush with scarlet berries,
    And there were hemlocks heaped with snow,
  With a sound like surf on long sea-beaches
    They took the wind and let it go.

  The hills were shining in their samite,
    Fold after fold they flowed away;
  "Let come what may," your eyes were saying,
    "At least we two have had to-day."


     IV

  Evening

  (_Nahant_)

  There was an evening when the sky was clear,
    Ineffably translucent in its blue;
    The tide was falling, and the sea withdrew
  In hushed and happy music from the sheer
  Shadowy granite of the cliffs; and fear
    Of what life may be, and what death can do,
    Fell from us like steel armor, and we knew
  The beauty of the Law that holds us here.

  It was as though we saw the Secret Will,
    It was as though we floated and were free;
      In the south-west a planet shone serenely,
      And the high moon, most reticent and queenly,
  Seeing the earth had darkened and grown still,
    Misted with light the meadows of the sea.




  WORDS FOR AN OLD AIR


  Your heart is bound tightly, let
    Beauty beware;
  It is not hers to set
    Free from the snare.

  Tell her a bleeding hand
    Bound it and tied it;
  Tell her the knot will stand
    Though she deride it.

  One who withheld so long
    All that you yearned to take,
  Has made a snare too strong
    For Beauty's self to break.




  THOSE WHO LOVE


  Those who love the most
  Do not talk of their love;
  Francesca, Guenevere,
  Dierdre, Iseult, Heloise
  In the fragrant gardens of heaven
  Are silent, or speak, if at all,
  Of fragile, inconsequent things.

  And a woman I used to know
  Who loved one man from her youth,
  Against the strength of the fates
  Fighting in lonely pride,
  Never spoke of this thing,
  But hearing his name by chance,
  A light would pass over her face.




  TWO SONGS FOR SOLITUDE


        I

  ~The Crystal Gazer~

  I shall gather myself into myself again,
    I shall take my scattered selves and make them one,
  I shall fuse them into a polished crystal ball
    Where I can see the moon and the flashing sun.

  I shall sit like a sibyl, hour after hour intent,
    Watching the future come and the present go--
  And the little shifting pictures of people rushing
    In tiny self-importance to and fro.


        II

  ~The Solitary~

  My heart has grown rich with the passing of years,
    I have less need now than when I was young
  To share myself with every comer,
    Or shape my thoughts into words with my tongue.

  It is one to me that they come or go
    If I have myself and the drive of my will,
  And strength to climb on a summer night
    And watch the stars swarm over the hill.

  Let them think I love them more than I do,
    Let them think I care, though I go alone,
  If it lifts their pride, what is it to me
    Who am self-complete as a flower or a stone?




  LOUIS UNTERMEYER




  MONOLOG FROM A MATTRESS

  _Heinrich Heine aetat 56, loquitur:_


  Can that be you, _la mouche?_ Wait till I lift
  This palsied eye-lid and make sure.... Ah, true.
  Come in, dear fly, and pardon my delay
  In thus existing; I can promise you
  Next time you come you'll find no dying poet--
  Without sufficient spleen to see me through,
  The joke becomes too tedious a jest.
  I am afraid my mind is dull to-day;
  I have that--something--heavier on my chest
  And then, you see, I've been exchanging thoughts
  With Doctor Franz. He talked of Kant and Hegel
  As though he'd nursed them both through whooping cough
  And, as he left, he let his finger shake
  Too playfully, as though to say, "Now off
  With that long face--you've years and years to live."
  I think he thinks so. But, for Heaven's sake,
  Don't credit it--and never tell Mathilde.
  Poor dear, she has enough to bear already....

  This _was_ a month! During my lonely weeks
  One person actually climbed the stairs
  To seek a cripple. It was Berlioz--
  But Berlioz always was original.
  Meissner was also here; he caught me unawares,
  Scribbling to my old mother. "What!" he cried,
  "Is the old lady of the _Dammthor_ still alive?
  And do you write her still?" "Each month or so."
  "And is she not unhappy then, to find
  How wretched you must be?" "How can she know?
  You see," I laughed, "she thinks I am as well
  As when she saw me last. She is too blind
  To read the papers--some one else must tell
  What's in my letters, merely signed by me.
  Thus she is happy. For the rest--
  That any son should be as sick as I,
  No mother could believe."
                          _Ja_, so it goes.

  Come here, my lotus-flower. It is best
  I drop the mask to-day; the half-cracked shield
  Of mockery calls for younger hands to wield.
  Laugh--or I'll hug it closer to my breast.
  So ... I can be as mawkish as I choose
  And give my thoughts an airing, let them loose
  For one last rambling stroll before--Now look!
  Why tears? You never heard me say "the end."
  Before ... before I clap them in a book
  And so get rid of them once and for all.
  This is their holiday--we'll let them run--
  Some have escaped already. There goes one ...
  What, I have often mused, did Goethe mean?
  So many years ago at Weimar, Goethe said
  "Heine has all the poet's gifts but love."
  Good God! But that is all I ever had.
  More than enough! So much of love to give
  That no one gave me any in return.
  And so I flashed and snapped in my own fires
  Until I stood, with nothing left to burn,
  A twisted trunk, in chilly isolation.
  _Ein Fichtenbaum steht einsam_--you recall?
  I was that Northern tree and, in the South,
  Amalia.... So I turned to scornful cries,
  Hot iron songs to save the rest of me;
  Plunging the brand in my own misery.
  Crouching behind my pointed wall of words,
  Ramparts I built of moons and loreleys,
  Enchanted roses, sphinxes, love-sick birds,
  Giants, dead lads who left their graves to dance,
  Fairies and phoenixes and friendly gods--
  A curious frieze, half Renaissance, half Greek,
  Behind which, in revulsion of romance,
  I lay and laughed--and wept--till I was weak.
  Words were my shelter, words my one escape,
  Words were my weapons against everything.
  Was I not once the son of Revolution?
  Give me the lyre, I said, and let me sing
  My song of battle: Words like flaming stars
  Shot down with power to burn the palaces;
  Words like bright javelins to fly with fierce
  Hate of the oily Philistines and glide
  Through all the seven heavens till they pierce
  The pious hypocrites who dare to creep
  Into the Holy Places. "Then," I cried,
  "I am a fire to rend and roar and leap;
  I am all joy and song, all sword and flame!"
  Ha--you observe me passionate. I aim
  To curb these wild emotions lest they soar
  Or drive against my will. (So I have said
  These many years--and still they are not tame.)
  Scraps of a song keep rumbling in my head ...
  Listen--you never heard me sing before.

    When a false world betrays your trust
      And stamps upon your fire,
    When what seemed blood is only rust,
      Take up the lyre!

    How quickly the heroic mood
      Responds to its own ringing;
    The scornful heart, the angry blood
      Leap upward, singing!

  Ah, that was how it used to be. But now,
  _Du schoner Todesengel_, it is odd
  How more than calm I am. Franz said it shows
  Power of religion, and it does, perhaps--
  Religion or morphine or poultices--God knows.
  I sometimes have a sentimental lapse
  And long for saviours and a physical God.
  When health is all used up, when money goes,
  When courage cracks and leaves a shattered will,
  Then Christianity begins. For a sick Jew,
  It is a very good religion ... Still,
  I fear that I will die as I have lived,
  A long-nosed heathen playing with his scars,
  A pagan killed by weltschmerz ... I remember,
  Once when I stood with Hegel at a window,
  I, being full of bubbling youth and coffee,
  Spoke in symbolic tropes about the stars.
  Something I said about "those high
  Abodes of all the blest" provoked his temper.
  "Abodes? The stars?" He froze me with a sneer,
  "A light eruption on the firmament."
  "But," cried romantic I, "is there no sphere
  Where virtue is rewarded when we die?"
  And Hegel mocked, "A very pleasant whim.
  So you demand a bonus since you spent
  One lifetime and refrained from poisoning
  Your testy grandmother!" ... How much of him
  Remains in me--even when I am caught
  In dreams of death and immortality.

  To be eternal--what a brilliant thought!
  It must have been conceived and coddled first
  By some old shopkeeper in Nuremberg,
  His slippers warm, his children amply nursed,
  Who, with his lighted meerschaum in his hand,
  His nightcap on his head, one summer night
  Sat drowsing at his door. And mused, how grand
  If all of this could last beyond a doubt--
  This placid moon, this plump _gemuthlichkeit_;
  Pipe, breath and summer never going out--
  To vegetate through all eternity ...
  But no such everlastingness for me!
  God, if he can, keep me from such a blight.

    _Death, it is but the long, cool night,
      And Life's a dull and sultry day.
      It darkens; I grow sleepy;
    I am weary of the light._

    _Over my bed a strange tree gleams
      And there a nightingale is loud.
      She sings of love, love only ...
    I hear it, even in dreams._

  My Mouche, the other day as I lay here,
  Slightly propped up upon this mattress-grave
  In which I've been interred these few eight years,
  I saw a dog, a little pampered slave,
  Running about and barking. I would have given
  Heaven could I have been that dog; to thrive
  Like him, so senseless--and so much alive!
  And once I called myself a blithe Hellene,
  Who am too much in love with life to live.
  (The shrug is pure Hebraic) ... For what I've been,
  A lenient Lord will tax me--and forgive.
  _Dieu me pardonnera--c'est son metier._
  But this is jesting. There are other scandals
  You haven't heard ... Can it be dusk so soon?
  Or is this deeper darkness ...? Is that you,
  Mother? How did you come? Where are the candles?...
  _Over my bed a strange tree gleams_--half filled
  With stars and birds whose white notes glimmer through
  Its seven branches now that all is stilled.
  What? Friday night again and all my songs
  Forgotten? Wait ... I still can sing--
  _Sh'ma Yisroel Adonai Elohenu,
  Adonai Echod ..._
                      Mouche--Mathilde!...




  WATERS OF BABYLON


  What presses about us here in the evening
    As you open a window and stare at a stone-gray sky,
  And the streets give back the jangle of meaningless movement
    That is tired of life and almost too tired to die.

  Night comes on, and even the night is wounded;
    There, on its breast, it carries a curved, white scar.
  What will you find out there that is not torn and anguished?
    Can God be less distressed than the least of His creatures are?

  Below are the blatant lights in a huddled squalor;
    Above are futile fires in freezing space.
  What can they give that you should look to them for compassion
    Though you bare your heart and lift an imploring face?

  They have seen, by countless waters and windows,
    The women of your race facing a stony sky;
  They have heard, for thousands of years, the voices of women
    Asking them: "Why ...?"

  Let the night be; it has neither knowledge nor pity.
    One thing alone can hope to answer your fear;
  It is that which struggles and blinds us and burns between us....
    Let the night be. Close the window, beloved.... Come here.




  THE FLAMING CIRCLE


  Though for fifteen years you have chaffed me across the table,
    Slept in my arms and fingered my plunging heart,
  I scarcely know you; we have not known each other.
    For all the fierce and casual contacts, something keeps us apart.

  Are you struggling, perhaps, in a world that I see only dimly,
    Except as it sweeps toward the star on which I stand alone?
  Are we swung like two planets, compelled in our separate orbits,
    Yet held in a flaming circle far greater than our own?

  Last night we were single, a radiant core of completion,
    Surrounded by flames that embraced us but left no burns,
  To-day we are only ourselves; we have plans and pretensions;
    We move in dividing streets with our small and different concerns.

  Merging and rending, we wait for the miracle. Meanwhile
    The fire runs deeper, consuming these selves in its growth.
  Can this be the mystical marriage--this clash and communion;
    This pain of possession that frees and encircles us both?




  PORTRAIT OF A MACHINE


  What nudity is beautiful as this
  Obedient monster purring at its toil;
  These naked iron muscles dripping oil
  And the sure-fingered rods that never miss.
  This long and shining flank of metal is
  Magic that greasy labor cannot spoil;
  While this vast engine that could rend the soil
  Conceals its fury with a gentle hiss.

  It does not vent its loathing, does not turn
  Upon its makers with destroying hate.
  It bears a deeper malice; lives to earn
  Its master's bread and laughs to see this great
  Lord of the earth, who rules but cannot learn,
  Become the slave of what his slaves create.




  ROAST LEVIATHAN


  "_Old Jews!_" Well, David, aren't we?
  What news is that to make you see so red,
  To swear and almost tear your beard in half?
  Jeered at? Well, let them laugh.
  You can laugh longer when you're dead.

  What? Are you still too blind to see?
  Have you forgot your Midrash!... They were right,
  The little _goyim_, with their angry stones.
  You should be buried in the desert out of sight
  And not a dog should howl miscarried moans
  Over your foul bones....

  Have you forgotten what is promised us,
  Because of stinking days and rotting nights?
  Eternal feasting, drinking, blazing lights
  With endless leisure, periods of play!
  Supernal pleasures, myriads of gay
  Discussions, great debates with prophet-kings!
  And rings of riddling scholars all surrounding
  God who sits in the very middle, expounding
  The Torah.... _Now_ your dull eyes glisten!
  Listen:

  It is the final Day.
  A blast of Gabriel's horn has torn away
  The last haze from our eyes, and we can see
  Past the three hundred skies and gaze upon
  The Ineffable Name engraved deep in the sun.
  Now one by one, the pious and the just
  Are seated by us, radiantly risen
  From their dull prison in the dust.
  And then the festival begins!
  A sudden music spins great webs of sound
  Spanning the ground, the stars and their companions;
  While from the cliffs and canons of blue air,
  Prayers of all colors, cries of exultation
  Rise into choruses of singing gold.
  And at the height of this bright consecration,
  The whole Creation's rolled before us.
  The seven burning heavens unfold....
  We see the first (the only one we know)
  Dispersed and, shining through,
  The other six declining: Those that hold
  The stars and moons, together with all those
  Containing rain and fire and sullen weather;
  Cellars of dew-fall higher than the brim;
  Huge arsenals with centuries of snows;
  Infinite rows of storms and swarms of seraphim....

       *     *     *     *     *

  Divided now are winds and waters. Sea and land,
  Tohu and Bohu, light and darkness, stand
  Upright on either hand.
  And down this terrible aisle,
  While heaven's ranges roar aghast,
  Pours a vast file of strange and hidden things:
  Forbidden monsters, crocodiles with wings
  And perfumed flesh that sings and glows
  With more fresh colors than the rainbow knows....
  The _reem_, those great beasts with eighteen horns,
  Who mate but once in seventy years and die
  In their own tears which flow ten stadia high.
  The _shamir_, made by God on the sixth morn,
  No longer than a grain of barley corn
  But stronger than the bull of Bashan and so hard
  It cuts through diamonds. Meshed and starred
  With precious stones, there struts the shattering _ziz_
  Whose groans are wrinkled thunder....
  For thrice three hundred years the full parade
  Files past, a cavalcade of fear and wonder.
  And then the vast aisle clears.

  Now comes our constantly increased reward.
  The Lord commands that monstrous beast,
  Leviathan, to be our feast.
  What cheers ascend from horde on ravenous horde!
  One hears the towering creature rend the seas,
  Frustrated, cowering, and his pleas ignored.
  In vain his great, belated tears are poured--
  For this he was created, kept and nursed.
  Cries burst from all the millions that attend:
  _"Ascend, Leviathan, it is the end!
  We hunger and we thirst! Ascend!" ..._

  Observe him first, my friend.

      _God's deathless plaything rolls an eye
      Five hundred thousand cubits high.
      The smallest scale upon his tail
      Could hide six dolphins and a whale.
      His nostrils breathe--and on the spot
      The churning waves turn seething hot.
      If he be hungry, one huge fin
      Drives seven thousand fishes in;
      And when he drinks what he may need,
      The rivers of the earth recede.
      Yet he is more than huge and strong--
      Twelve brilliant colors play along
      His sides until, compared to him,
      The naked, burning sun seems dim.
      New scintillating rays extend
      Through endless singing space and rise
      Into an ecstasy that cries:
      "Ascend, Leviathan, ascend!"_

  God now commands the multi-colored bands
  Of angels to intrude and slay the beast
  That His good sons may have a feast of food.
  But as they come, Leviathan sneezes twice ...
  And, numb with sudden pangs, each arm hangs slack.
  Black terror seizes them; blood freezes into ice
  And every angel flees from the attack!
  God, with a look that spells eternal law,
  Compels them back.
  But, though they fight and smite him tail and jaw,
  Nothing avails; upon his scales their swords
  Break like frayed cords or, like a blade of straw,
  Bend towards the hilt and wilt like faded grass.
  Defeat and fresh retreat.... But once again
  God's murmurs pass among them and they mass
  With firmer steps upon the crowded plain.
  Vast clouds of spears and stones rise from the ground;
  But every dart flies past and rocks rebound
  To the disheartened angels falling around.

  A pause.
  The angel host withdraws
  With empty boasts throughout its sullen files.
  Suddenly God smiles....
  On the walls of heaven a tumble of light is caught.
  Low thunder rumbles like an afterthought;
  And God's slow laughter calls:
  "Behemot!"

      _Behemot, sweating blood,
      Uses for his daily food
      All the fodder, flesh and juice
      That twelve tall mountains can produce._

      _Jordan, flooded to the brim,
      Is a single gulp to him;
      Two great streams from Paradise
      Cool his lips and scarce suffice._

      _When he shifts from side to side
      Earthquakes gape and open wide;_
      _When a nightmare makes him snore,
      All the dead volcanoes roar._

      _In the space between each toe,
      Kingdoms rise and saviours go;
      Epochs fall and causes die
      In the lifting of his eye._

      _Wars and justice, love and death,
      These are but his wasted breath;
      Chews a planet for his cud--
      Behemot sweating blood._

  Roused from his unconcern,
  Behemot burns with anger.
  Dripping sleep and languor from his heavy haunches,
  He turns from deep disdain and launches
  Himself upon the thickening air,
  And, with weird cries of sickening despair,
  Flies at Leviathan.
  None can surmise the struggle that ensues--
  The eyes lose sight of it and words refuse
  To tell the story in its gory might.
  Night passes after night,
  And still the fight continues, still the sparks
  Fly from the iron sinews, ... till the marks
  Of fire and belching thunder fill the dark
  And, almost torn asunder, one falls stark,
  Hammering upon the other!...
  What clamor now is born, what crashings rise!
  Hot lightnings lash the skies and frightening cries
  Clash with the hymns of saints and seraphim.
  The bloody limbs thrash through a ruddy dusk,
  Till one great tusk of Behemot has gored
  Leviathan, restored to his full strength,
  Who, dealing fiercer blows in those last throes,
  Closes on reeling Behemot at length--
  Piercing him with steel-pointed claws,
  Straight through the jaws to his disjointed head.
  And both lie dead.

  _Then_ come the angels!
  With hoists and levers, joists and poles,
  With knives and cleavers, ropes and saws,
  Down the long slopes to the gaping maws,
  The angels hasten; hacking and carving,
  So nought will be lacking for the starving
  Chosen of God, who in frozen wonderment
  Realize now what the terrible thunder meant.
  How their mouths water while they are looking
  At miles of slaughter and sniffing the cooking!
  Whiffs of delectable fragrance swim by;
  Spice-laden vagrants that float and entice,
  Tickling the throat and brimming the eye.
  Ah! what rejoicing and crackling and roasting!
  Ah! How the boys sing as, cackling and boasting,
  The angels' old wives and their nervous assistants
  Run in to serve us....

                          And while we are toasting
  The Fairest of All, they call from the distance
  The rare ones of Time, they share our enjoyment;
  Their only employment to bear jars of wine
  And shine like the stars in a circle of glory.
  Here sways Rebekah accompanied by Zilpah;
  Miriam plays to the singing of Bilhah;
  Hagar has tales for us, Judith her story;
  Esther exhales bright romances and musk.
  There, in the dusky light, Salome dances.
  Sara and Rachel and Leah and Ruth,
  Fairer than ever and all in their youth,
  Come at our call and go by our leave.
  And, from her bower of beauty, walks Eve
  While, with the voice of a flower, she sings
  Of Eden, young earth and the birth of all things....

  Peace without end.
  Peace will descend on us, discord will cease;
  And we, now so wretched, will lie stretched out
  Free of old doubt, on our cushions of ease.
  And, like a gold canopy over our bed,
  The skin of Leviathan, tail-tip to head,
  Soon will be spread till it covers the skies.
  Light will still rise from it; millions of bright
  Facets of brilliance, shaming the white
  Glass of the moon, inflaming the night.

  So Time shall pass and rest and pass again,
  Burn with an endless zest and then return,
  Walk at our side and tide us to new joys;
  God's voice to guide us, beauty as our staff.
  Thus shall Life be when Death has disappeared....

  _Jeered at? Well, let them laugh._




  JOHN GOULD FLETCHER




  A REBEL


  Tie a bandage over his eyes,
  And at his feet
  Let rifles drearily patter
  Their death-prayers of defeat.

  Throw a blanket over his body,
  It need no longer stir;
  Truth will but stand the stronger
  For all who died for her.

  Now he has broken through
  To his own secret place;
  Which, if we dared to do,
  We would have no more power left to look on that dead face.




  THE ROCK


  This rock, too, was a word;
  A word of flame and force when that which hurled
  The stars into their places in the night
  First stirred.

  And, in the summer's heat,
  Lay not your hand on it, for while the iron hours beat
  Gray anvils in the sky, it glows again
  With unfulfilled desire.

  Touch it not; let it stand
  Ragged, forlorn, still looking at the land;
  The dry blue chaos of mountains in the distance,
  The slender blades of grass it shelters are
  Its own dark thoughts of what is near and far.
  Your thoughts are yours, too; naked let them stand.




  BLUE WATER


  Sea-violins are playing on the sands;
  Curved bows of blue and white are flying over the pebbles,
  See them attack the chords--dark basses, glinting trebles.
  Dimly and faint they croon, blue violins.
  "Suffer without regret," they seem to cry,
  "Though dark your suffering is, it may be music,
  Waves of blue heat that wash midsummer sky;
  Sea-violins that play along the sands."




  PRAYERS FOR WIND


  Let the winds come,
  And bury our feet in the sands of seven deserts;
  Let strong breezes rise,
  Washing our ears with the far-off sounds of the foam.
  Let there be between our faces
  Green turf and a branch or two of back-tossed trees;
  Set firmly over questioning hearts
  The deep unquenchable answer of the wind.




  IMPROMPTU


  My mind is a puddle in the street reflecting green Sirius;
  In thick dark groves trees huddle lifting their branches like
        beckoning hands.
  We eat the grain, the grain is death, all goes back to the earth's
        dark mass,
  All but a song which moves across the plain like the wind's
        deep-muttering breath.
  Bowed down upon the earth, man sets his plants and watches for the
        seed,
  Though he be part of the tragic pageant of the sky, no heaven will
        aid his mortal need.
  I find flame in the dust, a word once uttered that will stir again,
  And a wine-cup reflecting Sirius in the water held in my hands.




  CHINESE POET AMONG BARBARIANS


  The rain drives, drives endlessly,
  Heavy threads of rain;
  The wind beats at the shutters,
  The surf drums on the shore;
  Drunken telegraph poles lean sideways;
  Dank summer cottages gloom hopelessly;
  Bleak factory-chimneys are etched on the filmy distance,
  Tepid with rain.
  It seems I have lived for a hundred years
  Among these things;
  And it is useless for me now to make complaint against them.
  For I know I shall never escape from this dull barbarian country,
  Where there is none now left to lift a cool jade winecup,
  Or share with me a single human thought.




  SNOWY MOUNTAINS


  Higher and still more high,
  Palaces made for cloud,
  Above the dingy city-roofs
  Blue-white like angels with broad wings,
  Pillars of the sky at rest
  The mountains from the great plateau
  Uprise.

  But the world heeds them not;
  They have been here now for too long a time.
  The world makes war on them,
  Tunnels their granite cliffs,
  Splits down their shining sides,
  Plasters their cliffs with soap-advertisements,
  Destroys the lonely fragments of their peace.

  Vaster and still more vast,
  Peak after peak, pile after pile,
  Wilderness still untamed,
  To which the future is as was the past,
  Barrier spread by Gods,
  Sunning their shining foreheads,
  Barrier broken down by those who do not need
  The joy of time-resisting storm-worn stone,
  The mountains swing along
  The south horizon of the sky;
  Welcoming with wide floors of blue-green ice
  The mists that dance and drive before the sun.




  THE FUTURE


  After ten thousand centuries have gone,
  Man will ascend the last long pass to know
  That all the summits which he saw at dawn
  Are buried deep in everlasting snow.

  Below him endless gloomy valleys, chill,
  Will wreathe and whirl with fighting cloud, driven by the wind's
        fierce breath;
  But on the summit, wind and cloud are still:--
  Only the sunlight, and death.

  And staggering up to the brink of the gulf man will look down
  And painfully strive with weak sight to explore
  The silent gulfs below which the long shadows drown;
  Through every one of these he passed before.

  Then since he has no further heights to climb,
  And naught to witness he has come this endless way,
  On the wind-bitten ice cap he will wait for the last of time,
  And watch the crimson sunrays fading of the world's latest day:

  And blazing stars will burst upon him there,
  Dumb in the midnight of his hope and pain,
  Speeding no answer back to his last prayer,
  And, if akin to him, akin in vain.




  UPON THE HILL


  A hundred miles of landscape spread before me like a fan;
  Hills behind naked hills, bronze light of evening on them shed;
  How many thousand ages have these summits spied on man?
  How many thousand times shall I look on them ere this fire in me is
        dead?




  THE ENDURING


  If the autumn ended
  Ere the birds flew southward,
  If in the cold with weary throats
  They vainly strove to sing,
  Winter would be eternal;
  Leaf and bush and blossom
  Would never once more riot
  In the spring.

  If remembrance ended
  When life and love are gathered,
  If the world were not living
  Long after one is gone,
  Song would not ring, nor sorrow
  Stand at the door in evening;
  Life would vanish and slacken,
  Men would be changed to stone.

  But there will be autumn's bounty
  Dropping upon our weariness,
  There will be hopes unspoken
  And joys to haunt us still;
  There will be dawn and sunset
  Though we have cast the world away,
  And the leaves dancing
  Over the hill.




  JEAN STARR UNTERMEYER




  OLD MAN


  When an old man walks with lowered head
  And eyes that do not seem to see,
  I wonder does he ponder on
  The worm he was or is to be.

  Or has he turned his gaze within,
  Lost to his own vicinity;
  Erecting in a doubtful dream
  Frail bridges to Infinity.




  TONE PICTURE

  (Malipiero: _Impressioni Dal Vero_)


  Across the hot square, where the barbaric sun
  Pours coarse laughter on the crowds,
  Trumpets throw their loud nooses
  From corner to corner.
  Elephants, whose indifferent backs
  Heave with red lambrequins,
  Tigers with golden muzzles,
  Negresses, greased and turbaned in green and yellow,
  Weave and interweave in the merciless glare of noon.
  The sun flicks here and there like a throned tyrant,
  Snapping his whip.
  From amber platters, the smells ascend
  Of overripe peaches mingled with dust and heated oils.
  Pages in purple run madly about,
  Rolling their eyes and grinning with huge, frightened mouths.

  And from a high window--a square of black velvet--
  A haughty figure stands back in the shadow,
  Aloof and silent.




  THEY SAY--


  They say I have a constant heart, who know
    Not anything of how it turns and yields
    First here, first there; nor how in separate fields
  It runs to reap and then remains to sow;
  How, with quick worship, it will bend and glow
    Before a line of song, an antique vase,
    Evening at sea; or in a well-loved face
  Seek and find all that Beauty can bestow.

  Yet they do well who name it with a name,
    For all its rash surrenders call it true.
  Though many lamps be lit, yet flame is flame;
    The sun can show the way, a candle too.
  The tribute to each fragment is the same
    Service to all of Beauty--and her due.




  RESCUE


  Wind and wave and the swinging rope
  Were calling me last night;
  None to save and little hope,
  No inner light.

  Each snarling lash of the stormy sea
  Curled like a hungry tongue.
  One desperate splash--and no use to me
  The noose that swung!

  Death reached out three crooked claws
  To still my clamoring pain.
  I wheeled about, and Life's gray jaws
  Grinned once again.

  To sea I gazed, and then I turned
  Stricken toward the shore,
  Praying half-crazed to a moon that burned
  Above your door.

  And at your door, you discovered me;
  And at your heart, I sobbed ...
  And if there be more of eternity
  Let me be robbed.

  Let me be clipped of that heritage
  And burned for ages through;
  Freed and stripped of my fear and rage--
  But not of you.




  MATER IN EXTREMIS


  I stand between them and the outer winds,
  But I am a crumbling wall.
  They told me they could bear the blast alone,
  They told me: that was all.
  But I must wedge myself between
  Them and the first snowfall.

  Riddled am I by onslaughts and attacks
  I thought I could forestall;
  I reared and braced myself to shelter them
  Before I heard them call.
  I cry them, God, a better shield!
  I am about to fall.




  SELF-REJECTED


  Plow not nor plant this arid mound.
  Here is no sap for seed,
  No ferment for your need--
  Ungrateful ground!

  No sun can warm this spot
  God has forgot;
  No rain can penetrate
  Its barren slate.

  Demonic winds blow last year's stubble
  From its hard slope.
  Go, leave the hopeless without hope;
  Spare your trouble.




  H. D.




  HOLY SATYR


  Most holy Satyr,
  like a goat,
  with horns and hooves
  to match thy coat
  of russet brown,
  I make leaf-circlets
  and a crown of honey-flowers
  for thy throat;
  where the amber petals
  drip to ivory,
  I cut and slip
  each stiffened petal
  in the rift
  of carven petal:
  honey horn
  has wed the bright
  virgin petal of the white
  flower cluster: lip to lip
  let them whisper,
  let them lilt, quivering:

  Most holy Satyr,
  like a goat,
  hear this our song,
  accept our leaves,
  love-offering,
  return our hymn;
  like echo fling
  a sweet song,
  answering note for note.




  LAIS


  Let her who walks in Paphos
  take the glass,
  let Paphos take the mirror
  and the work of frosted fruit,
  gold apples set
  with silver apple-leaf,
  white leaf of silver
  wrought with vein of gilt.

  Let Paphos lift the mirror;
  let her look
  into the polished center of the disk.

  Let Paphos take the mirror:
  did she press
  flowerlet of flame-flower
  to the lustrous white
  of the white forehead?
  did the dark veins beat
  a deeper purple
  than the wine-deep tint
  of the dark flower?

  Did she deck black hair,
  one evening, with the winter-white
  flower of the winter-berry?
  Did she look (reft of her lover)
  at a face gone white
  under the chaplet
  of white virgin-breath?

  Lais, exultant, tyrannizing Greece,
  Lais who kept her lovers in the porch,
  lover on lover waiting
  (but to creep
  where the robe brushed the threshold
  where still sleeps Lais),
  so she creeps, Lais,
  to lay her mirror at the feet
  of her who reigns in Paphos.

  Lais has left her mirror,
  for she sees no longer in its depth
  the Lais' self
  that laughed exultant,
  tyrannizing Greece.

  Lais has left her mirror,
  for she weeps no longer,
  finding in its depth
  a face, but other
  than dark flame and white
  feature of perfect marble.

  _Lais has left her mirror_
  (so one wrote)
  _to her who reigns in Paphos;
  Lais who laughed a tyrant over Greece,
  Lais who turned the lovers from the porch,
  that swarm for whom now
  Lais has no use;
  Lais is now no lover of the glass,
  seeing no more the face as once it was,
  wishing to see that face and finding this._




  HELIODORA


  He and I sought together,
  over the spattered table,
  rhymes and flowers,
  gifts for a name.

  He said, among others,
  I will bring
  (and the phrase was just and good,
  but not as good as mine)
  "the narcissus that loves the rain."

  We strove for a name,
  while the light of the lamps burnt thin
  and the outer dawn came in,
  a ghost, the last at the feast
  or the first,
  to sit within
  with the two that remained
  to quibble in flowers and verse
  over a girl's name.

  He said, "the rain loving,"
  I said, "the narcissus, drunk,
  drunk with the rain."

  Yet I had lost
  for he said,
  "the rose, the lover's gift,
  is loved of love,"
  he said it,
  "loved of love;"
  I waited, even as he spoke,
  to see the room filled with a light,
  as when in winter
  the embers catch in a wind
  when a room is dank:
  so it would be filled, I thought,
  our room with a light
  when he said
  (and he said it first)
  "the rose, the lover's delight,
  is loved of love,"
  but the light was the same.

  Then he caught,
  seeing the fire in my eyes,
  my fire, my fever, perhaps,
  for he leaned
  with the purple wine
  stained in his sleeve,
  and said this:
  "Did you ever think
  a girl's mouth
  caught in a kiss
  is a lily that laughs?"

  I had not.
  I saw it now
  as men must see it forever afterwards;
  no poet could write again,
  "the red-lily,
  a girl's laugh caught in a kiss;"
  it was his to pour in the vat
  from which all poets dip and quaff,
  for poets are brothers in this.

  So I saw the fire in his eyes,
  it was almost my fire
  (he was younger)
  I saw the face so white;
  my heart beat,
  it was almost my phrase,
  I said, "surprise the muses,
  take them by surprise;
  it is late,
  rather it is dawn-rise,
  those ladies sleep, the nine,
  our own king's mistresses."

  A name to rhyme,
  flowers to bring to a name,
  what was one girl faint and shy,
  with eyes like the myrtle
  (I said: "her underlids
  are rather like myrtle"),
  to vie with the nine?

  Let him take the name,
  he had the rhymes,
  "the rose, loved of love,"
  "the lily, a mouth that laughs,"
  he had the gift,
  "the scented crocus,
  the purple hyacinth,"
  what was one girl to the nine?

  He said:
  "I will make her a wreath;"
  he said:
  "I will write it thus:
  _'I will bring you the lily that laughs,
  I will twine
  with soft narcissus, the myrtle,
  sweet crocus, white violet,
  the purple hyacinth and, last,
  the rose, loved of love,
  that these may drip on your hair
  the less soft flowers,
  may mingle sweet with the sweet
  of Heliodora's locks,
  myrrh-curled.'_"

  (He wrote myrrh-curled,
  I think, the first.)

  I said:
  "they sleep, the nine,"
  when he shouted swift and passionate:
  "_that_ for the nine!
  Above the mountains
  the sun is about to wake,
  _and to-day white violets
  shine beside white lilies
  adrift on the mountain side;
  to-day the narcissus opens
  that loves the rain_."

  I watched him to the door,
  catching his robe
  as the wine-bowl crashed to the floor,
  spilling a few wet lees
  (ah, his purple hyacinth!);
  I saw him out of the door,
  I thought:
  there will never be a poet,
  in all the centuries after this,
  who will dare write,
  after my friend's verse,
  "a girl's mouth
  is a lily kissed."




  TOWARD THE PIRAEUS


  _Slay with your eyes, Greek,
  men over the face of the earth,
  slay with your eyes, the host,
  puny, passionless, weak._

  _Break, as the ranks of steel
  broke of the Persian host:
  craven, we hated them then:
  now we would count them Gods
  beside these, spawn of the earth._

  _Grant us your mantle, Greek;
  grant us but one
  to fright (as your eyes) with a sword,
  men, craven and weak,
  grant us but one to strike
  one blow for you, passionate Greek._


        I

  You would have broken my wings,
  but the very fact that you knew
  I had wings, set some seal
  on my bitter heart, my heart
  broke and fluttered and sang.

  You would have snared me,
  and scattered the strands of my nest;
  but the very fact that you saw,
  sheltered me, claimed me,
  set me apart from the rest.

  Of men--of _men_ made you a god,
  and me, claimed me, set me apart
  and the song in my breast, yours, yours forever--
  if I escape your evil heart.


        II

  I loved you:
  men have writ and women have said
  they loved,
  but as the Pythoness stands by the altar,
  intense and may not move;

  till the fumes pass over;
  and may not falter nor break,
  till the priest has caught the words
  that mar or make
  a deme or a ravaged town;

  so I, though my knees tremble,
  my heart break,
  must note the rumbling,
  heed only the shuddering
  down in the fissure beneath the rock
  of the temple floor;

  must wait and watch
  and may not turn nor move,
  nor break from my trance to speak
  so slight, so sweet,
  so simple a word as love.


        III

  What had you done
  had you been true,
  I can not think,
  I may not know.

  What could we do
  were I not wise,
  what play invent,
  what joy devise?

  What could we do
  if you were great?
  (Yet were you lost,
  who were there, then,
  to circumvent
  the tricks of men?)

  What can we do,
  for curious lies
  have filled your heart,
  and in my eyes
  sorrow has writ
  that I am wise.


        IV

  If I had been a boy,
  I would have worshiped your grace,
  I would have flung my worship
  before your feet,
  I would have followed apart,
  glad, rent with an ecstasy
  to watch you turn
  your great head, set on the throat,
  thick, dark with its sinews,
  burned and wrought
  like the olive stalk,
  and the noble chin
  and the throat.

  I would have stood,
  and watched and watched
  and burned,
  and when in the night,
  from the many hosts, your slaves,
  and warriors and serving men
  you had turned
  to the purple couch and the flame
  of the woman, tall like cypress tree
  that flames sudden and swift and free
  as with crackle of golden resin
  and cones and the locks flung free
  like the cypress limbs,
  bound, caught and shaken and loosed,
  bound, caught and riven and bound
  and loosened again,
  as in rain of a kingly storm
  or wind full from a desert plain.

  So, when you had risen
  from all the lethargy of love and its heat,
  you would have summoned me, me alone,
  and found my hands,
  beyond all the hands in the world,
  cold, cold, cold,
  intolerably cold and sweet.


        V

  It was not chastity that made me cold nor fear,
  only I knew that you, like myself, were sick
  of the puny race that crawls and quibbles and lisps
  of love and love and lovers and love's deceit.

  It was not chastity that made me wild but fear
  that my weapon, tempered in different heat,
  was over-matched by yours, and your hand
  skilled to yield death-blows, might break.

  With the slightest turn--no ill-will meant--
  my own lesser, yet still somewhat fine-wrought
  fiery-tempered, delicate, over-passionate steel.




  CONRAD AIKEN




  SEVEN TWILIGHTS


        I

  The ragged pilgrim, on the road to nowhere,
  Waits at the granite milestone. It grows dark.
  Willows lean by the water. Pleas of water
  Cry through the trees. And on the boles and boughs
  Green water-lights make rings, already paling.
  Leaves speak everywhere. The willow leaves
  Silverly stir on the breath of moving water,
  Birch-leaves, beyond them, twinkle, and there on the hill,
  And the hills beyond again, and the highest hill,
  Serrated pines, in the dusk, grow almost black.
  By the eighth milestone on the road to nowhere
  He drops his sack, and lights once more the pipe
  There often lighted. In the dusk-sharpened sky
  A pair of night-hawks windily sweep, or fall,
  Booming, toward the trees. Thus had it been
  Last year, and the year before, and many years:
  Ever the same. "Thus turns the human track
  Backward upon itself, I stand once more
  By this small stream..." Now the rich sound of leaves,
  Turning in air to sway their heavy boughs,
  Burns in his heart, sings in his veins, as spring
  Flowers in veins of trees; bringing such peace
  As comes to seamen when they dream of seas.
  "O trees! exquisite dancers in gray twilight!
  Witches! fairies! elves! who wait for the moon
  To thrust her golden horn, like a golden snail,
  Above that mountain--arch your green benediction
  Once more over my heart. Muffle the sound of bells,
  Mournfully human, that cries from the darkening valley;
  Close, with your leaves, about the sound of water:
  Take me among your hearts as you take the mist
  Among your boughs!" ... Now by the granite milestone,
  On the ancient human road that winds to nowhere,
  The pilgrim listens, as the night air brings
  The murmured echo, perpetual, from the gorge
  Of barren rock far down the valley. Now,
  Though twilight here, it may be starlight there;
  Mist makes elfin lakes in the hollow fields;
  The dark wood stands in the mist like a somber island
  With one red star above it.... "This I should see,
  Should I go on, follow the falling road,--
  This I have often seen.... But I shall stay
  Here, where the ancient milestone, like a watchman,
  Lifts up its figure eight, its one gray knowledge,
  Into the twilight; as a watchman lifts
  A lantern, which he does not know is out."


        II

  Now by the wall of the ancient town I lean
  Myself, like ancient wall and dust and sky,
  And the purple dusk, grown old, grown old in heart.
  Shadows of clouds flow inward from the sea.
  The mottled fields grow dark. The golden wall
  Grows gray again, turns stone again, the tower,
  No longer kindled, darkens against a cloud.
  Old is the world, old as the world am I;
  The cries of sheep rise upward from the fields,
  Forlorn and strange; and wake an ancient echo
  In fields my heart has known, but has not seen.
  "These fields"--an unknown voice beyond the wall
  Murmurs--"were once the province of the sea.
  Where now the sheep graze, mermaids were at play,
  Sea-horses galloped, and the great jeweled tortoise
  Walked slowly, looking upward at the waves,
  Bearing upon his back a thousand barnacles,
  A white acropolis ..." The ancient tower
  Sends out, above the houses and the trees,
  And the wide fields below the ancient walls,
  A measured phrase of bells. And in the silence
  I hear a woman's voice make answer then:
  "Well, they are green, although no ship can sail them....
  Sky-larks rest in the grass, and start up singing
  Before the girl who stoops to pick sea-poppies.
  Spiny, the poppies are, and oh how yellow!
  And the brown clay is runneled by the rain...."
  A moment since, the sheep that crop the grass
  Had long blue shadows, and the grass-tips sparkled:
  Now all grows old.... O voices strangely speaking,
  Voices of man and woman, voices of bells,
  Diversely making comment on our time
  Which flows and bears us with it into dusk,
  Repeat the things you say! Repeat them slowly
  Upon this air, make them an incantation
  For ancient tower, old wall, the purple twilight,
  This dust, and me. But all I hear is silence,
  And something that may be leaves or may be sea.


        III

  When the tree bares, the music of it changes:
  Hard and keen is the sound, long and mournful;
  Pale are the poplar boughs in the evening light
  Above my house, against a slate-cold cloud.
  When the house ages and the tenants leave it,
  Cricket sings in the tall grass by the threshold;
  Spider, by the cold mantel, hangs his web.
  Here, in a hundred years from that clear season
  When first I came here, bearing lights and music,
  To this old ghostly house my ghost will come,--
  Pause in the half-light, turn by the poplar, glide
  Above tall grasses through the broken door.
  Who will say that he saw--or the dusk deceived him--
  A mist with hands of mist blow down from the tree
  And open the door and enter and close it after?
  Who will say that he saw, as midnight struck
  Its tremulous golden twelve, a light in the window,
  And first heard music, as of an old piano,
  Music remote, as if it came from the earth,
  Far down; and then, in the quiet, eager voices?
  "... Houses grow old and die, houses have ghosts--
  Once in a hundred years we return, old house,
  And live once more." ... And then the ancient answer,
  In a voice not human, but more like creak of boards
  Or rattle of panes in the wind--"Not as the owner,
  But as a guest you come, to fires not lit
  By hands of yours.... Through these long-silent chambers
  Move slowly, turn, return, and bring once more
  Your lights and music. It will be good to talk."


        IV

  "This is the hour," she said, "of transmutation:
  It is the eucharist of the evening, changing
  All things to beauty. Now the ancient river,
  That all day under the arch was polished jade,
  Becomes the ghost of a river, thinly gleaming
  Under a silver cloud.... It is not water:
  It is that azure stream in which the stars
  Bathe at the daybreak, and become immortal...."
  "And the moon," said I--not thus to be outdone--
  "What of the moon? Over the dusty plane-trees
  Which crouch in the dusk above their feeble lanterns,
  Each coldly lighted by his tiny faith;
  The moon, the waxen moon, now almost full,
  Creeps whitely up.... Westward the waves of cloud,
  Vermilion, crimson, violet, stream on the air,
  Shatter to golden flakes in the icy green
  Translucency of twilight.... And the moon
  Drinks up their light, and as they fade or darken,
  Brightens.... O monstrous miracle of the twilight,
  That one should live because the others die!"
  "Strange too," she answered, "that upon this azure
  Pale-gleaming ghostly stream, impalpable--
  So faint, so fine that scarcely it bears up
  The petals that the lantern strews upon it,--
  These great black barges float like apparitions,
  Loom in the silver of it, beat upon it,
  Moving upon it as dragons move on air."
  "Thus always," then I answered,--looking never
  Toward her face, so beautiful and strange
  It grew, with feeding on the evening light,--
  "The gross is given, by inscrutable God,
  Power to beat wide wings upon the subtle.
  Thus we ourselves, so fleshly, fallible, mortal,
  Stand here, for all our foolishness, transfigured:
  Hung over nothing in an arch of light
  While one more evening like a wave of silence
  Gathers the stars together and goes out."


        V

  Now the great wheel of darkness and low clouds
  Whirs and whirls in the heavens with dipping rim;
  Against the ice-white wall of light in the west
  Skeleton trees bow down in a stream of air.
  Leaves, black leaves and smoke, are blown on the wind;
  Mount upward past my window; swoop again;
  In a sharp silence, loudly, loudly falls
  The first cold drop, striking a shriveled leaf....
  Doom and dusk for the earth! Upward I reach
  To draw chill curtains and shut out the dark,
  Pausing an instant, with uplifted hand,
  To watch, between black ruined portals of cloud,
  One star,--the tottering portals fall and crush it.
  Here are a thousand books! here is the wisdom
  Alembicked out of dust, or out of nothing;
  Choose now the weightiest word, most golden page,
  Most somberly musicked line; hold up these lanterns,--
  These paltry lanterns, wisdoms, philosophies,--
  Above your eyes, against this wall of darkness;
  And you'll see--what? One hanging strand of cobweb,
  A window-sill a half-inch deep in dust ...
  Speak out, old wise-men! Now, if ever, we need you.
  Cry loudly, lift shrill voices like magicians
  Against this baleful dusk, this wail of rain....
  But you are nothing! Your pages turn to water
  Under my fingers: cold, cold and gleaming,
  Arrowy in the darkness, rippling, dripping--
  All things are rain.... Myself, this lighted room,
  What are we but a murmurous pool of rain?...
  The slow arpeggios of it, liquid, sibilant,
  Thrill and thrill in the dark. World-deep I lie
  Under a sky of rain. Thus lies the sea-shell
  Under the rustling twilight of the sea;
  No gods remember it, no understanding
  Cleaves the long darkness with a sword of light.


        VI

  Heaven, you say, will be a field in April,
  A friendly field, a long green wave of earth,
  With one domed cloud above it. There you'll lie
  In noon's delight, with bees to flash above you,
  Drown amid buttercups that blaze in the wind,
  Forgetting all save beauty. There you'll see
  With sun-filled eyes your one great dome of cloud
  Adding fantastic towers and spires of light,
  Ascending, like a ghost, to melt in the blue.
  Heaven enough, in truth, if you were there!
  Could I be with you I would choose your noon,
  Drown amid buttercups, laugh with the intimate grass,
  Dream there forever.... But, being older, sadder,
  Having not you, nor aught save thought of you,
  It is not spring I'll choose, but fading summer;
  Not noon I'll choose, but the charmed hour of dusk.
  Poppies? A few! And a moon almost as red....
  But most I'll choose that subtler dusk that comes
  Into the mind--into the heart, you say--
  When, as we look bewildered at lovely things,
  Striving to give their loveliness a name,
  They are forgotten; and other things, remembered,
  Flower in the heart with the fragrance we call grief.


        VII

  In the long silence of the sea, the seaman
  Strikes twice his bell of bronze. The short note wavers
  And loses itself in the blue realm of water.
  One sea-gull, paired with a shadow, wheels, wheels;
  Circles the lonely ship by wave and trough;
  Lets down his feet, strikes at the breaking water,
  Draws up his golden feet, beats wings, and rises
  Over the mast.... Light from a crimson cloud
  Crimsons the sluggishly creeping foams of waves;
  The seaman, poised in the bow, rises and falls
  As the deep forefoot finds a way through waves;
  And there below him, steadily gazing westward,
  Facing the wind, the sunset, the long cloud,
  The goddess of the ship, proud figurehead,
  Smiles inscrutably, plunges to crying waters,
  Emerges streaming, gleaming, with jewels falling
  Fierily from carved wings and golden breasts;
  Steadily glides a moment, then swoops again.
  Carved by the hand of man, grieved by the wind;
  Worn by the tumult of all the tragic seas,
  Yet smiling still, unchanging, smiling still
  Inscrutably, with calm eyes and golden brow--
  What is it that she sees and follows always,
  Beyond the molten and ruined west, beyond
  The light-rimmed sea, the sky itself? What secret
  Gives wisdom to her purpose? Now the cloud
  In final conflagration pales and crumbles
  Into the darkening waters. Now the stars
  Burn softly through the dusk. The seaman strikes
  His small lost bell again, watching the west
  As she below him watches.... O pale goddess
  Whom not the darkness, even, or rain or storm,
  Changes; whose great wings are bright with foam,
  Whose breasts are cold as the sea, whose eyes forever
  Inscrutably take that light whereon they look--
  Speak to us! Make us certain, as you are,
  That somewhere, beyond wave and wave and wave,
  That dreamed-of harbor lies which we would find.




  TETELESTAI


        I

  How shall we praise the magnificence of the dead,
  The great man humbled, the haughty brought to dust?
  Is there a horn we should not blow as proudly
  For the meanest of us all, who creeps his days,
  Guarding his heart from blows, to die obscurely?
  I am no king, have laid no kingdoms waste,
  Taken no princes captive, led no triumphs
  Of weeping women through long walls of trumpets;
  Say rather I am no one, or an atom;
  Say rather, two great gods in a vault of starlight
  Play ponderingly at chess; and at the game's end
  One of the pieces, shaken, falls to the floor
  And runs to the darkest corner; and that piece
  Forgotten there, left motionless, is I....
  Say that I have no name, no gifts, no power,
  Am only one of millions, mostly silent;
  One who came with lips and hands and a heart,
  Looked on beauty, and loved it, and then left it.
  Say that the fates of time and space obscured me,
  Led me a thousand ways to pain, bemused me,
  Wrapped me in ugliness; and like great spiders
  Dispatched me at their leisure.... Well, what then?
  Should I not hear, as I lie down in dust,
  The horns of glory blowing above my burial?


        II

  Morning and evening opened and closed above me:
  Houses were built above me; trees let fall
  Yellowing leaves upon me, hands of ghosts,
  Rain has showered its arrows of silver upon me
  Seeking my heart; winds have roared and tossed me;
  Music in long blue waves of sound has borne me
  A helpless weed to shores of unthought silence;
  Time, above me, within me, crashed its gongs
  Of terrible warning, sifting the dust of death;
  And here I lie. Blow now your horns of glory
  Harshly over my flesh, you trees, you waters!
  You stars and suns, Canopus, Deneb, Rigel,
  Let me, as I lie down, here in this dust,
  Hear, far off, your whispered salutation!
  Roar now above my decaying flesh, you winds,
  Whirl out your earth-scents over this body, tell me
  Of ferns and stagnant pools, wild roses, hillsides!
  Anoint me, rain, let crash your silver arrows
  On this hard flesh! I am the one who named you,
  I lived in you, and now I die in you.
  I, your son, your daughter, treader of music,
  Lie broken, conquered.... Let me not fall in silence.


        III

  I, the restless one; the circler of circles;
  Herdsman and roper of stars, who could not capture
  The secret of self; I who was tyrant to weaklings,
  Striker of children; destroyer of women; corrupter
  Of innocent dreamers, and laugher at beauty; I,
  Too easily brought to tears and weakness by music,
  Baffled and broken by love, the helpless beholder
  Of the war in my heart of desire with desire, the struggle
  Of hatred with love, terror with hunger; I
  Who laughed without knowing the cause of my laughter, who grew
  Without wishing to grow, a servant to my own body;
  Loved without reason the laughter and flesh of a woman,
  Enduring such torments to find her! I who at last
  Grow weaker, struggle more feebly, relent in my purpose,
  Choose for my triumph an easier end, look backward
  At earlier conquests; or, caught in the web, cry out
  In a sudden and empty despair, "Tetelestai!"
  Pity me, now! I, who was arrogant, beg you!
  Tell me, as I lie down, that I was courageous.
  Blow horns of victory now, as I reel and am vanquished.
  Shatter the sky with trumpets above my grave.


        IV

  ... Look! this flesh how it crumbles to dust and is blown!
  These bones, how they grind in the granite of frost and are nothing!
  This skull, how it yawns for a flicker of time in the darkness
  Yet laughs not and sees not! It is crushed by a hammer of sunlight,
  And the hands are destroyed.... Press down through the leaves of the
        jasmine,
  Dig through the interlaced roots--nevermore will you find me;
  I was no better than dust, yet you cannot replace me....
  Take the soft dust in your hand--does it stir: does it sing?
  Has it lips and a heart? Does it open its eyes to the sun?
  Does it run, does it dream, does it burn with a secret, or tremble
  In terror of death? Or ache with tremendous decisions?...
  Listen!... It says: "I lean by the river. The willows
  Are yellowed with bud. White clouds roar up from the south
  And darken the ripples; but they cannot darken my heart,
  Nor the face like a star in my heart!... Rain falls on the water
  And pelts it, and rings it with silver. The willow trees glisten,
  The sparrows chirp under the eaves; but the face in my heart
  Is a secret of music.... I wait in the rain and am silent."
  Listen again!... It says: "I have worked, I am tired,
  The pencil dulls in my hand: I see through the window
  Walls upon walls of windows with faces behind them,
  Smoke floating up to the sky, an ascension of seagulls.
  I am tired. I have struggled in vain, my decision was fruitless,
  Why then do I wait? with darkness, so easy, at hand!...
  But to-morrow, perhaps.... I will wait and endure till
        to-morrow!..."
  Or again: "It is dark. The decision is made. I am vanquished
  By terror of life. The walls mount slowly about me
  In coldness. I had not the courage. I was forsaken.
  I cried out, was answered by silence.... Tetelestai!..."


        V

  Hear how it babbles!--Blow the dust out of your hand,
  With its voices and visions, tread on it, forget it, turn homeward
  With dreams in your brain.... This, then, is the humble, the
        nameless,--
  The lover, the husband and father, the struggler with shadows,
  The one who went down under shoutings of chaos! The weakling
  Who cried his "forsaken!" like Christ on the darkening hilltop!...
  This, then, is the one who implores, as he dwindles to silence,
  A fanfare of glory.... And which of us dares to deny him!




  EDNA ST. VINCENT MILLAY




  EIGHT SONNETS


        I

  When you, that at this moment are to me
  Dearer than words on paper, shall depart,
  And be no more the warder of my heart,
  Whereof again myself shall hold the key;
  And be no more, what now you seem to be,
  The sun, from which all excellencies start
  In a round nimbus, nor a broken dart
  Of moonlight, even, splintered on the sea;

  I shall remember only of this hour--
  And weep somewhat, as now you see me weep--
  The pathos of your love, that, like a flower,
  Fearful of death yet amorous of sleep,
  Droops for a moment and beholds, dismayed,
  The wind whereon its petals shall be laid.


        II

  What's this of death, from you who never will die?
  Think you the wrist that fashioned you in clay,
  The thumb that set the hollow just that way
  In your full throat and lidded the long eye
  So roundly from the forehead, will let lie
  Broken, forgotten, under foot some day
  Your unimpeachable body, and so slay
  The work he most had been remembered by?

  I tell you this: whatever of dust to dust
  Goes down, whatever of ashes may return
  To its essential self in its own season,
  Loveliness such as yours will not be lost,
  But, cast in bronze upon his very urn,
  Make known him Master, and for what good reason.


        III

  I know I am but summer to your heart,
  And not the full four seasons of the year;
  And you must welcome from another part
  Such noble moods as are not mine, my dear.
  No gracious weight of golden fruits to sell
  Have I, nor any wise and wintry thing;
  And I have loved you all too long and well
  To carry still the high sweet breast of spring.

  Wherefore I say: O love, as summer goes,
  I must be gone, steal forth with silent drums,
  That you may hail anew the bird and rose
  When I come back to you, as summer comes.
  Else will you seek, at some not distant time,
  Even your summer in another clime.


        IV

  Here is a wound that never will heal, I know,
  Being wrought not of a dearness and a death
  But of a love turned ashes and the breath
  Gone out of beauty; never again will grow
  The grass on that scarred acre, though I sow
  Young seed there yearly and the sky bequeath
  Its friendly weathers down, far underneath
  Shall be such bitterness of an old woe.

  That April should be shattered by a gust,
  That August should be leveled by a rain,
  I can endure, and that the lifted dust
  Of man should settle to the earth again;
  But that a dream can die, will be a thrust
  Between my ribs forever of hot pain.


        V

  What lips my lips have kissed, and where, and why,
  I have forgotten, and what arms have lain
  Under my head till morning; but the rain
  Is full of ghosts to-night, that tap and sigh
  Upon the glass and listen for reply;
  And in my heart there stirs a quiet pain,
  For unremembered lads that not again
  Will turn to me at midnight with a cry.

  Thus in the winter stands the lonely tree,
  Nor knows what birds have vanished one by one,
  Yet knows its boughs more silent than before:
  I cannot say what loves have come and gone;
  I only know that summer sang in me
  A little while, that in me sings no more.


        VI

  Euclid alone has looked on Beauty bare.
  Let all who prate of Beauty hold their peace,
  And lay them prone upon the earth and cease
  To ponder on themselves, the while they stare
  At nothing, intricately drawn nowhere
  In shapes of shifting lineage; let geese
  Gabble and hiss, but heroes seek release
  From dusty bondage into luminous air.

  O blinding hour, O holy, terrible day,
  When first the shaft into his vision shone
  Of light anatomized! Euclid alone
  Has looked on Beauty bare. Fortunate they
  Who, though once only and then but far away,
  Have heard her massive sandal set on stone.


        VII

  Oh, oh, you will be sorry for that word!
  Give back my book and take my kiss instead.
  Was it my enemy or my friend I heard?--
  "What a big book for such a little head!"
  Come, I will show you now my newest hat,
  And you may watch me purse my mouth and prink.
  Oh, I shall love you still and all of that.
  I never again shall tell you what I think.

  I shall be sweet and crafty, soft and sly;
  You will not catch me reading any more;
  I shall be called a wife to pattern by;
  And some day when you knock and push the door,
  Some sane day, not too bright and not too stormy,
  I shall be gone, and you may whistle for me.


        VIII

  Say what you will, and scratch my heart to find
  The roots of last year's roses in my breast;
  I am as surely riper in my mind
  As if the fruit stood in the stalls confessed.
  Laugh at the unshed leaf, say what you will,
  Call me in all things what I was before,
  A flutterer in the wind, a woman still;
  I tell you I am what I was and more.

  My branches weigh me down, frost cleans the air,
  My sky is black with small birds bearing south;
  Say what you will, confuse me with fine care,
  Put by my word as but an April truth,--
  Autumn is no less on me that a rose
  Hugs the brown bough and sighs before it goes.





